Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure        Effective Date: September 1, 2015

                                      TABLE OF CONTENT

01.00           Introduction……………………………………………………………………....02

01.10           Policies and Procedures…………………………………………………………..03

        01.11 Intake……………………………………………………………………………..03

        01.12 Assessment Process…………………………………………………………........05

        01.13 Appeals…………………………………………………………………………...06

        01.14 Service Planning…………………………………………………………….........06

        01.15 Program Enrollment……………………………………………………………...08

        01.16 Case Transfer for Ongoing Care Coordination…………………………………….08

        01.17 Authorization……………………………………………………………………..08

        01.18 Monitoring……………………………………………………………………......09

                01.18.10 Monthly Monitoring……………………………………….............…09
                01.18.20 Quarterly Contact………………………………………………..........09
                01.18.30 Re-evaluation…………………………………………………………10

        01.19 Medical Ineligibility………………………………………………………….........12

        01.20 Financial Ineligibility……………………………………………………...........…12

        01.21 Transfer………………………………………………………………………......13

                01.21.10 Transfer to a Home and Community Based Waiver……………..........13
                01.21.20 Transfer from a Home and Community Based Waiver………….........14
                01.21.30 Transfer to another Care Coordination Provider…………………...…14

        01.22 Termination…………………………………………………………………........15

        01.23 Case Filing and Documentation………………………………………………….16

        01.24 Medical Necessity Criteria………………………………………………………..19




                                                                                       Page 1
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure               Effective Date: September 1, 2015

01.00           Introduction

                The Department of Health and Human Services Children's Personal Care Service
                (CPC) was developed in response to the special need for personal care services for
                children with special long term care needs.

                It is a Title XIX (Medicaid) State Plan service available to Medicaid eligible
                individuals under the age of 21 who meet the Medical Necessity Criteria for the
                Children’s Personal Care Service. The Children’s Personal Care Service is not
                a Medicaid waiver program. The only service authorized under this program is
                Children’s Personal Care.

                CLTC Nurse Consultants are responsible for initial assessment and medical
                necessity determination for Children’s Personal Care cases. Contract Care
                Coordinators are responsible for ongoing management and annual re-evaluation.




                                                                                              Page 2
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                 Effective Date: September 1, 2015




01.10           Policies and Procedures

        01.11 Intake

                A referral can be made by any knowledgeable source through CLTC Centralized
                Intake. Information about Medicaid applicants and recipients, including those
                persons referred to the CLTC Program, shall be safeguarded in accordance with the
                provisions of the South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services
                regulations governing confidentiality and HIPAA (Regulations 126-170, et seq.)

                Confidential information includes, but is not limited to:

                1. The name and address of the individual served and the service they receive;

                2. Medical data, including diagnosis and past history of disease or disability;

                3. Agency evaluation of information about a person;

                4. The identity of persons or institutions that furnished health services to a person;

                5. The social and economic conditions or circumstances of any person served; and,

                6. Federal program information identified as confidential by appropriate federal
                   authority.

                All CLTC representatives/workers, contract workers, all persons receiving services
                from CLTC, and all other persons dealing with CLTC shall be informed of the
                Agency's policies and regulations with respect to safeguarding of confidential
                information.

                Referral information is evaluated based on the Medical Necessity Criteria to
                determine if the applicant is appropriate for further screening. If not, potential
                resources which could meet the applicant's needs should be reviewed with the
                referral source or applicant.

                In order for a referral to be considered appropriate for intake, the applicant must
                meet the following criteria:

                1.      Be under 21 years of age;

                2.      Be a resident of South Carolina (out-of-state applicants must intend to locate
                        within the geographic area); and,

                3.      Be a current Medicaid recipient; if the applicant is not a current Medicaid


                                                                                                Page 3
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                  Effective Date: September 1, 2015

                        Recipient or has not applied for Medicaid, the applicant should be referred
                        to the County Medicaid Eligibility (CME) office. If the applicant is a
                        current Medicaid recipient and a “1" appears in the RSP indicator field, the
                        RSP screen must be reviewed. Please refer to RSP overlap chart located in
                        Phoenix HELP and note appropriate action to be taken.
                        .
                4.      Be seeking Children’s Personal Care Service.

                               If the applicant is HIV positive, he/she must first be considered for
                                the HIV/AIDS waiver. If determined inappropriate for the
                                HIV/AIDS waiver, proceed with the Children’s Personal Care
                                Service evaluation.

                               A participant enrolled in the HIV or ID/RD home and community
                                based waiver is not eligible for the Children’s Personal Care Service
                                because Personal Care II is a service available in the HIV or ID/RD
                                waiver Personal Care II services will be authorized through the
                                respective waiver.

                               The Head and Spinal Cord Injury (HASCI) and Pervasive
                                Developmental Disorder (PDD) waiver do not have Personal Care
                                II (PC II) as a waiver service; therefore, if a participant is under 21
                                years of age and in the HASCI or PDD waiver, the participant may
                                participate or continue to participate in the Children’s Personal Care
                                Service. The participant may receive attendant care through the
                                HASCI waiver while receiving the Children’s Personal Care
                                Service.

                               Children enrolled in the Medicaid hospice benefit may receive
                                Children’s Personal Care Service; however, the Children’s Personal
                                Care Service is limited to 10 hours per week.

                               Children enrolled in a Medicaid HMO or PEP may receive
                                Children’s Personal Care Service.

                               Children participating in the Medically Complex Children Waiver
                                (MCC) or Children’s Private Duty Nursing Service (CPDN) will
                                have Children’s Personal Care Service authorized by MCC area.

                If the applicant is appropriate for further screening, the Centralized Intake
                Program Assistant completes the appropriate screens in Phoenix. The case is then
                released to the appropriate Area Office and assigned to a CLTC Nurse Consultant.




                                                                                                 Page 4
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure               Effective Date: September 1, 2015

        01.12 Assessment Process

                The Nurse Consultant schedules and completes an assessment visit with the
                applicant within fifteen (15) business days of case assignment. A home visit is
                required unless the parent or primary contact requests an alternate visit location.
                This exception must be approved by the CLTC Area Administrator or CLTC Lead
                Team Nurse Consultant. The visit must be made in the presence of a parent or
                knowledgeable other adult of the parent’s choosing.

                If the Nurse Consultant is unable to contact the parent or primary contact within
                fifteen (15) business days, a CLTC Notification Form 171 will be sent to the parent
                or primary contact requesting contact be made with CLTC in order to schedule a
                visit. If no response is received within ten (10) calendar days, the case may be
                terminated as “unable to locate.”

                Note: If an initial assessment for level of care for TEFRA or HASCI has been
                completed within 180 days of the Children’s Personal Care application, the
                Children’s Personal Care assessment can be completed by the Nurse Consultant
                by phone and a home visit is not required. An explanation of the service may be
                given via the phone. A consent form should be mailed to the parent or primary
                contact for signature. The CLTC Nurse Consultant may proceed with the
                assessment while awaiting the Consent Form but no further action should be taken
                prior to receipt of the form. The Children’s Services Physician Information Form
                must be completed by the physician prior to medical necessity determination.

                During the home visit, the Nurse Consultant should complete and obtain the
                following:

                        Consent Form;
                        Children’s Services Rights and Responsibilities Statement;
                        Assessment;
                        Medications;
                        Caregiver Supports/Permissions (only the caregiver name, phone number
                         and tasks are required).

                The following information is sent to the physician to determine medical necessity:

                1.       Children’s Services Physician's Request Letter;
                2.       Copy of Consent Form; and
                3.       Children’s Services Physician Information Form (The CLTC Nurse
                         Consultant completes Section I).

                If no response from the physician is received within ten (10) business days, a
                telephone call or letter should be initiated by the Nurse Consultant and
                documented in the Narrative. The parent or primary contact or referral source may
                be helpful in expediting receipt of information from the physician.

                                                                                              Page 5
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                 Effective Date: September 1, 2015



                If the information received during the CLTC Nurse Consultant’s assessment is
                conflicting or does not support the physician's recommendation of medical
                necessity, contact with other involved agencies may be indicated.

                Once all information is complete, the case must be team staffed by two CLTC Nurse
                Consultants within three (3) business days to determine if the applicant meets the
                Medical Necessity Criteria. This team staffing will be documented in Phoenix. If
                the local CLTC office is unable to determine medical necessity, the case will be
                referred to the CLTC Central Office for consultation or determination. An email
                including the applicant’s CLTC number will be sent to the Central Office Designee.

                If the applicant is determined to meet the Medical Necessity Criteria, notification
                to the parent or primary contact will be made using the CLTC Notification Form
                171.

                If the applicant is determined to not meet the Medical Necessity Criteria,
                notification of denial must be made using the CLTC Notification Form 171
                including the Appeals Notice.

        01.13 Appeals

                Any Medicaid applicant or recipient has the right to request an appeal of any
                decision by CLTC which adversely affects his/her eligibility status and/or receipt
                of services and/or assistance. This includes decisions to deny, reduce, suspend, or
                terminate a service. The formal process of review and adjudication of CLTC
                actions/determinations is done under the authority of Section 1-23-310 et seq., Code
                of Laws, State of South Carolina, 1976, as amended, and the South Carolina
                Department of Health and Human Services regulations Section 126-150, et seq.

                The applicant, participant or designated representative must write a letter
                requesting an appeal within 30 days of the date of the official written notification
                issued by CLTC. The letter should be addressed to:

                Appeals and Hearings Division
                South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services
                Post Office Box 8206
                Columbia, South Carolina 29202-8206

                Information regarding the individual's right to appeal and instructions for initiating
                an appeal are printed on the CLTC Notification Form 171.

        01.14 Service Planning

                The Nurse Consultant will initiate Service Planning for all applicants who meet
                the criteria for Children’s Personal Care Service. The service plan must be


                                                                                                Page 6
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                Effective Date: September 1, 2015

                completed within seven (7) business days of the medical necessity determination.

                In the interim, the CLTC Nurse Consultant is responsible for developing the
                Service Plan and obtaining prior approval for the Children’s Personal Care hours.

                Note: The service plan must be coordinated with the parent or primary contact.
                The Service Plan is accessible to the personal care provider in Phoenix and indicates
                the participant’s specific needs to the personal care provider.

                The following information will provide the CLTC Nurse Consultant with the basis
                for service planning:

                1.       The assessment completed by the CLTC Nurse Consultant;

                2.       Children’s Services Physician Information Form;

                3        Information gathered through home visit;


                After reviewing all available information, the CLTC Nurse Consultant will
                determine:

                1.       The participant’s needs;

                2.       The personal care activities needed; and,

                2.       The amount of time required for the Children’s Personal Care Aide to meet
                         these needs.

                A copy of the completed service plan must be sent to the parent or primary contact.

                The CLTC Nurse Consultant must request prior approval for the Children’s
                Personal Care hours in the Phoenix Service Plan. The determination of the number
                of Children’s Personal Care hours requested/ approved is based on the participant's
                needs and are not to exceed twenty-five (25) hours per week. Requests to exceed
                this limit must be prior approved by the Central Office

                Note: If the participant is ventilator dependent, a referral to the Medically Complex
                Children’s program for the Children’s Private Duty Nursing (CPDN) program
                should be made for children under 18 years of age.

                        The Children’s Personal Care Aide is not to be left alone with a child
                         requiring skilled care/ services. Any skilled care/ services will be
                         completed by the parent, primary contact or other designated caregiver.
                         Skilled care is not to be performed by the Children’s Personal Care Aide.



                                                                                               Page 7
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                Effective Date: September 1, 2015



                       The Children’s Personal Care Aide must be actively engaged in the
                        completion of allowable tasks determined to be needed by the CLTC Nurse
                        Consultant.

                       The provision of this service does not include supervision of the child
                        (“childcare”) as a discrete task nor does it include down-time between tasks
                        or time waiting for a task to be needed.

                       Family members, the personal care provider, and the Children’s Personal
                        Care Aide should be counseled on the duties, responsibilities, and
                        limitations of the service.

       01.15 Program Enrollment

                Following medical necessity determination, service planning and prior approval of
                the personal care hours, the application status is changed to “Participating.” Upon
                this status change, Phoenix will automatically assign a Care Coordination provider.
                The Nurse Consultant will notify the Designated Support Staff to enter the
                Children’s Personal Care enrollment date into Medicaid Management Information
                System (MMIS)/Recipient Special Program Summary (RSP) update screen. The
                RSP information is to be entered within four (4) calendar days of enrollment.

                The CLTC Nurse Consultant will create and send the CLTC Notification Form
                171 to the parent or primary contact and the primary case manager to confirm
                program entry.

        01.16 Case Transfer for Ongoing Case Coordination

                Once a Care Coordination provider has been assigned, the ongoing Care
                Coordinator will contact the assigned CLTC Nurse Consultant within two (2)
                business days to arrange a case transfer conference. .

                The CLTC Nurse Consultant will document the transfer conference in the
                participant’s narrative record in Phoenix.

                The newly assigned Care Coordinator will contact the parent or primary contact
                by phone to inform him/her of case transfer and to obtain personal care provider
                choices verbally. The Service Provider Choice Form may be mailed to obtain
                written provider choices. The parent or primary contact will make at least five (5)
                choices for Personal Care providers in order of preference. This contact and the
                personal care provider choices will be documented in the narrative.

        01.17 Authorization

                The Care Coordinator will create referrals to the chosen personal care providers

                                                                                               Page 8
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                  Effective Date: September 1, 2015

                in the order of preference. Once a provider accepts the referral, the Care
                Coordinator will create and send the Service Provision Form to the personal care
                provider.

                A family member can serve as the Children’s Personal Care Aide for the child if
                he/she is NOT the

                1. Parent (child under the age 18)
                2. Foster parent
                3. Step parent
                4. Legally responsible guardian or
                5. Health care power of attorney of the participant.

                Family members must meet the same qualifications outlined in the Personal Care
                Services Scope of Service.


        01.18 Monitoring

               01.18.10 Monthly Monitoring

                The participant must be Medicaid eligible in order to receive services. The Care
                Coordinator must verify Medicaid financial eligibility monthly through Phoenix
                or other means of Medicaid verification to ensure the participant has continued
                financial eligibility.

                01.18.20 Quarterly Contact

                The Care Coordinator is responsible for quarterly contacts with the parent or
                primary contact, provider and other agencies involved in the participant’s care.

                If it appears the participant no longer meets the Medical Necessity Criteria, a re-
                evaluation visit must be conducted.

                The Care Coordinator must review the Care Call Activity and Exception Reports,
                narrate Care Call service monitoring, and follow-up on any problems noted. No
                more than 7 calendar days prior to contact, Care Call Client Activity Report and
                the Care Call A2 Exception Report, covering the time period since the last report,
                must be viewed.

                This may be done by running the report prior to the contact or reviewing the report
                in real time.

                The Care Coordinator should look for patterns that may indicate problems, not
                isolated cases.



                                                                                                 Page 9
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                  Effective Date: September 1, 2015

                For the Care Call monitoring, narrate review of the Care Call report from (date) to
                (date). Also any problems, subsequent interventions, and resolutions must be
                narrated.

                Medicaid eligibility verification must be documented in the quarterly contact
                narrative in the participant’s record.

                The date the participant’s status is changed to “Participating” establishes the due
                date of the initial quarterly contact.

                The quarterly contact must be completed, documented and uploaded to the network
                by 11:59 PM on the last day of the month in which the contact is due.

                If the Care Coordinator makes a referral to Child Protective Services (CPS) or if
                the child has an open CPS case, the Care Coordinator should contact the assigned
                Child Protective Services Worker quarterly and document this contact in the
                narrative. A report should be made in the Complaint Section of Phoenix when the
                referral is made or the open CPS case is discovered.

                All quarterly contacts must be documented in the Narrative. The Narrative entry
                should, at a minimum, address verification of Medicaid eligibility, participant’s
                condition, appropriateness of service needs/service plan, and delivery of services.


                If in attempting to complete a quarterly contact, the Care Coordinator is unable
                to reach the parent or primary contact, a Notification Letter will be sent to the parent
                or primary contact requesting he/she contact the Care Coordinator to complete the
                required contact. If no response is received within ten (10) calendar days of
                mailing the Notification Letter, the Children’s service application may be
                terminated.

                01.18.30    Re-evaluation

                At a minimum, the Care Coordinator must complete a formal re-evaluation visit
                to the participant’s home by the last day of the month in which the re-evaluation is
                due.

                The case must be team staffed with a CLTC Nurse Consultant to complete the
                medical necessity determination. The CLTC Area Office will receive a Phoenix
                Notification for team staffing. The Area Administrator or Lead Team will delegate
                team staffing to the CLTC Area Office Nurse Consultants or Lead Team Nurse
                Consultant.

                The Care Coordinator must use Care Call to check in and out of the home for the
                visit.



                                                                                                Page 10
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                 Effective Date: September 1, 2015

                The Care Coordinator must review the Care Call Activity and Exception Reports,
                narrate Care Call service monitoring, and follow-up on any problems noted. No
                more than 7 calendar days prior to contact, Care Call Client Activity Report and
                the Care Call A2 Exception Report, covering the time period since the last report,
                must be viewed. This may be done by running the report prior to the contact or
                reviewing the report in real time. The Care Coordinator should look for patterns
                that may indicate problems, not isolated cases. For the Care Call monitoring, narrate
                review of the Care Call report from (date) to (date).

                Any problems, subsequent interventions, and resolutions must be narrated in the re-
                evaluation narrative.

                Medicaid eligibility verification must be documented in the narrative.

                The date of the medical necessity determination is the date from which the re-
                evaluation is scheduled.

                All re-evaluation activities must be completed, documented and uploaded to the
                network by 11:59 PM on the last day of the month in which the re-evaluation is
                due.

                For re-evaluation, the Care Coordinator should complete, obtain and review the
                following:

                       Review consent form
                       Review Children’s Services Rights and Responsibilities Form
                       Complete a new Assessment
                       Update Medications
                       Review Caregiver Supports/Permission and update if needed
                       Obtain Children’s Services Physician Information Form
                       Team staff with a CLTC Nurse Consultant to determine if medically
                        necessity criteria is met
                       Develop a new service plan

                The Physician’s Information Form will be sent prior to the assessment visit in
                order to allow timely for return of the form. If no response from the physician is
                received within ten (10) business days, a telephone call or letter should be initiated
                by the Care Coordinator and documented in the Narrative. The parent or primary
                contact or referral source may be helpful in expediting receipt of information from
                the physician.

                If the information received from the Care Coordinator’s assessment is conflicting
                or does not support the physician's recommendation of medical necessity, contact
                with other involved agencies may be indicated.

                If during the monitoring process a change occurs in the participant's service needs

                                                                                               Page 11
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                 Effective Date: September 1, 2015

                or living arrangements, a review of the appropriateness of the service plan and a
                review of the number of hours authorized must be conducted. This review should
                be conducted by phone with the parent or primary contact. It may also include
                contact with the primary case manager or other involved agency.

                A revision of the service plan and change in the number of hours authorized may
                be indicated. The Care Coordinator will complete a prior approval request for
                increased personal care hours in the service plan. The CLTC Area Office will
                receive a Phoenix Notification to review of the prior approval request. The Area
                Administrator will delegate this task to the CLTC Area Office Nurse Consultants
                and/ or Area Office Lead Team Nurse Consultant.

        01.19 Medical Ineligibility

                When a participant has been determined to not meet the medical necessity criteria,
                a Notification Letter is used to formally notify the parent or primary contact of this
                decision.

                The case should be reviewed with the designated CLTC Area Office Lead Team or
                Area Administrator prior to rendering a final decision. If the Area Administrator
                determines the case requires further review, it should then be referred to the Central
                Office Designee for a final level of care decision. Once the level of care is
                determined, Central Office will notify the Care Coordinator of the Medical
                Necessity Determination and the required third signature may be signed by the Area
                Administrator, Lead Team or Central Office Designee.

                If the applicant’s final level of care determination is medically ineligible, the team
                completes and signs the Assessment level of care section in Phoenix. A
                Notification Letter including the Appeals Notice will be sent to the parent or
                primary contact. The Care Coordinator terminates the program application in
                Phoenix and if appropriate terminates the case.

        01.20 Financial Ineligibility

                If at any point a participant becomes financially ineligible, all services must be
                terminated and the case must be closed effective the date of financial ineligibility.

                If Care Coordinator receives notification that a participant is losing financial
                eligibility, he/she must complete the following tasks:

                • Document verification of financial ineligibility via Phoenix, letter from Social
                  Security Administration, or written notice from Medicaid Eligibility.

                • Notify involved agencies by telephone call of participant’s termination from the
                  Children’s Personal Care program.



                                                                                               Page 12
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                Effective Date: September 1, 2015

                • Contact participant/primary contact to discuss termination, possible alternatives,
                  and referral to other agencies.

                • Complete a CLTC Notification Form 171 to notify participant/primary contact
                  indicating the date of termination will be the date of financial ineligibility.

                • Document all activities in the Narrative.

                • Terminate Care Coordination and Children’s Personal Care in Phoenix effective
                  the same date as financial ineligibility.

                • Complete Status Change section of Phoenix Applications to terminate the
                  Children’s Personal Care application and the case as “Financially Ineligible.”

        01.21 Transfer

                01.21.10     Transfer to a Home and Community Based Waiver

                        If a participant enrolled in Children’s Personal Care is to be admitted to a
                        waiver (CLTC or DDSN), activities must be coordinated with the
                        appropriate agency to ensure continuity of care. Adequate coordination
                        allows the participant to transfer from the Children’s Personal Care Program
                        to a waiver without a break in services. Appropriate forms must be
                        completed and forwarded as necessary.

                        If a participant between ages 18-21 requests or needs other waiver services,
                        he/she may be considered for transfer to the Community Choices waiver.
                        However, financial and medical eligibility for the waiver must be
                        established before a transfer can occur.

                        If a transfer to a CLTC waiver is appropriate, the following policy and
                        procedure must be followed:

                        1. The Care Coordinator must make an electronic referral for the waiver
                           via the web address https://phoenix.scdhhs.gov/cltc_referrals/new.

                       2. The Care Coordinator must coordinate the transition with the
                          receiving Case Manager II in order to avoid a break in Personal Care
                          services.

                       3. The Children’s Personal Care application must be closed in Phoenix by
                          the Care Coordinator.

                       4.    The Care Coordinator will notify the CLTC area office designee to
                            update the MMIS RSP. The end date for the CHPC (Children’s Personal
                            Care) RSP indicator will be the day before enrollment in the waiver.


                                                                                              Page 13
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                Effective Date: September 1, 2015



                       5.    The receiving Case Manager II will issue a new service provision form
                             to reflect the Waiver Personal Care II procedure code.

            01.21.20 Transfer from a Home and Community Based Waiver

                        If a participant enrolled in a waiver (MCC or DDSN) chooses to enroll in
                        Children’s Personal Care, activities must be coordinated with the
                        appropriate agency to ensure continuity of care. When a participant
                        transfers from the Children’s Personal Care Program to a waiver without a
                        break in services, the waiting list does not apply. Appropriate forms must
                        be completed and forwarded as necessary.

                        If a transfer from a CLTC waiver is appropriate, the Waiver Case
                        Manager must make a Children’s Personal Care referral electronically via
                        the web address: https://phoenix.scdhhs.gov/cltc_referrals/new.

            01.21.30    Transfer to another Care Coordination Provider

                        Upon receipt of notification of the participant’s relocation outside of the
                        Care Coordinator’s service area, the transferring Care Coordinator will
                        completes the following activities:

                               Sends an email notification to the Central Office Designee.

                               Enters the transfer information in the Narrative, indicating the new
                                address, directions to home, telephone number, and a statement of
                                the personal care provider's ability to continue service.

                               Completes the CLTC Notification Form 171 to notify involved
                                agencies, participant, primary contact, and/or knowledgeable other
                                of the transfer.

                        If the authorized personal care provider indicates the service can continue
                        in the new location, the Children’s personal care authorization may remain
                        open.

                        The receiving Care Coordinator completes the following activities:

                               Reviews participant’s information in Phoenix.

                               Contacts the participant, primary contact, and/or knowledgeable
                                other to update medical information and service needs.

                               Verifies Medicaid eligibility.


                                                                                              Page 14
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                Effective Date: September 1, 2015

                               Reviews the open personal care authorization for appropriateness.

                               Confirms with the personal care provider that the services may
                                continue with the current authorization.

                               Maintains the same schedule for quarterly monitoring and re-
                                evaluation visits.

                        RSP information does not need to be re-entered.

                01.22 Termination

                        If the participant’s condition changes and the participant no longer meets
                        the Medical Necessity Criteria,

                               Care coordination and personal care services will be terminated.

                               A written ten (10) calendar day notice must be given prior to
                                terminating the personal care service and the case.

                               The notification of this determination through the CLTC
                                Notification Form 171, including the Appeals Notice.

                               The date of and reason for closure must be indicated on the form (10
                                calendar days from the date of notification.)

                               A copy of the CLTC Notification Form 171 must be sent to the
                                parent or primary contact, personal care provider and the primary
                                case manager at the same time.

                        Once the ten (10) day notice has expired, the Care Coordinator notifies
                        the Area Office Designee to enter the termination date of the CHPC RSP
                        into Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) /Recipient Special
                        Program Summary (RSP) update screen.

                The RSP information is to be entered into MMIS within four (4) calendar days of
                closure.

                Since the participant is only eligible for the Children’s Personal Care through the
                end of the month the participant turns 21 years old, the ten (10) day notice must be
                given timely to ensure the case will be closed at the end of that month.


        01.23 Case Filing and Documentation

                Documentation is required to record any case activity in accordance to policy and

                                                                                              Page 15
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                              September 1, 2015

                procedures. Appropriate documentation is mandatory. All pertinent actions related
                to CLTC's processing of the case and the Care Coordinator’s service monitoring
                should be documented in the Narrative.

                       Documentation should be related to the participant and should reflect
                        factual information recorded in a professional manner.

                       Only approved acceptable abbreviations are to be used.

                       Correct spelling and proper grammar must be used.

                       Extraneous comments unrelated to the participant’s situation are not
                        appropriate for inclusion in the case record.

                       Personal opinions and judgmental statements are not appropriate for the
                        participant record.

                       Emails are not appropriate for the participant record.

                       Quality assurance reviews/forms must not be filed in the participant record.

                These standards for documentation apply to all correspondence and to ALL
                documentation in the Phoenix system. Narrative checklists and conversations are
                part of the narrative record.

                If participant information is documented somewhere in the participant record, it
                does not have to be repeated.

                When making a complaint in Phoenix, it MAY contain the CLTC number, provider
                name, provider worker name, and worker ID. It MAY NOT contain the participant
                name, participant Social Security or Medicaid number, or the names of relatives.

                The Conversation Tab feature may be used rather than contacting the provider by
                telephone. Examples of appropriate uses of Conversation are informing the
                provider of a schedule change, hospitalization, etc. However, when informing the
                provider of information that requires immediate attention such as an immediate
                termination, a telephone call for verbal communication is necessary. All
                documentation guidelines apply to the Conversation Tab feature in Phoenix.
                Correct spelling and proper grammar must be utilized. Only approved
                abbreviations are to be used.

                It is extremely important to document any data regarding participant’s needs.
                Follow up documentation is to be included as appropriate. If a need is identified in
                the narrative, any subsequent actions taken on the participant’s behalf are to be
                included in the narrative. All contacts made with the participant or on the
                participant’s behalf must be narrated. Documentation must be kept current. All

                                                                                             Page 16
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                               September 1, 2015

                contacts and actions must be narrated within 3 business days of the activity, unless
                a shorter period of time is otherwise specified in policy and procedures, contracts,
                or other official SCDHHS communications. Information entered in Phoenix Tablet
                Mode must be uploaded to the network daily.

                The date noted in the “Date of Contact” field in the narrative must be the date the
                activity or contact was completed. The date of the contact may also be entered in
                the text of the narrative but this is not required since the “Date of Contact” field
                denotes the date that the contact was made. The date the documentation is entered
                will automatically be recorded by Phoenix. Narrative documentation indicating
                activities completed over several days are not appropriate. Activities
                completed on a specific date should be documented indicating the appropriate
                date of contact. For example, if case activity was completed on July 6th and July
                7th and being narrated on July 7th, the worker will enter one narrative with a date of
                contact of July 6th and a separate narrative with a date of contact of July 7th.

                All documentation for the month must be keyed and uploaded to the network by
                11:59 pm of the last day of the month. This supersedes any documentation
                timeliness and policy guidelines. For example, documentation related to re-
                evaluations completed the last week of month but not due until the first week of the
                following month, must be completed by 11:59 of the month the visit was completed.

                When counting days for timeliness standard issues, the first day is determined to be
                the next business or calendar day depending on the standard. For example, the
                timeliness standard for documentation is 3 business days. For an activity that
                occurred on a business day Monday, Day 1 would be Tuesday, Day 2 would be
                Wednesday and Day 3 would be Thursday. Therefore the activity must be
                documented by 11:59 pm on Day 3, Thursday. Or for an activity that occurred on
                a business Day Friday, Day 1 would be Monday, Day 2 would be Tuesday, and Day
                3 would be Wednesday. Therefore the activity must be documented by 11:59 pm
                on Day 3, Wednesday. However, all documentation for the month must be keyed
                and uploaded to the network by 11:59 PM of the last day of the month regardless
                of timeliness standards.

                The first and last name and title, if applicable, of any person from whom
                information is received must be documented in the narrative. The primary contact
                and the physician are to be identified by name in the narrative, as the individuals
                assuming these roles may change over time.

                A fax copy of a document may be accepted and suffice for documentation in the
                record if legible. If a document is faxed to someone, there is no need to follow-up
                with an original by mail. The original must be scanned into Phoenix Scans. The
                overall rule is routing methods, such as mail or fax, should only be used when using
                Phoenix is not an option or when a back-up copy is also needed.

                All documents available in Phoenix are to be completed and maintained in Phoenix.


                                                                                              Page 17
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                            September 1, 2015

                All documents that are not available in Phoenix are to be maintained in Phoenix by
                scanning the document to the participant’s Phoenix file.

                All scanned documents are to be stored under the appropriate scan tag in Phoenix
                Scans. Please refer to the “Scan Tag Descriptions” document in Phoenix HELP to
                determine the appropriate scan tag for document placement.

                All documents received from outside sources, such as Physician’s Information
                Form and primary case manager packets, etc., are to be scanned into the database
                by 11:59 PM on the last day of the month unless the document is received within
                the last 3 business days of the month. In this situation, the document should be
                scanned into Phoenix by the 5th of the following month.

                The hard copy form may be disposed once the documents are confirmed to be
                present and readable in Phoenix Scans. All participant records must be disposed of
                following HIPAA policies.

                When paper forms are necessary, black ink should be used.

                All telephone contacts to participants, primary contacts, providers, etc. must be
                through verbal information exchange and not by electronic means (i.e. texting,
                Emailing, tweeting, twexting, etc.)




      01.24 Medical Necessity Criteria for the Children’s Personal Care Service

              An individual qualifies under the Medical Necessity Criteria for Children's Personal
              Care (CPC) Service if he/she meets the Service Needs Requirement and has one of
              the Functional Deficits listed below.

              Service Needs Requirement*

              The individual requires daily monitoring and observation due to medical needs which
              could result in medical complications. The medical needs must be documented, and
              the services of a personal care aide must be required and intended to maintain


                                                                                           Page 18
Division of Community Long Term Care
Children's Personal Care Service Policy and Procedure                                            September 1, 2015

              optimum health status.

              Functional Deficits **

              1. Requires extensive (hands on) assistance with bathing and dressing and toileting
                 and feeding if otherwise age appropriate functioning would normally allow these
                 activities. (All four must be present and constitute one deficit). Age 3 or above

              2. Requires extensive (hands on) assistance with walking or wheelchair locomotion
                 if these are otherwise age appropriate activities. Age 1 or above

              3. Requires extensive (hands on) assistance with transfer if otherwise age
                 appropriate activity. Age 1 or above

              4.    Requires extensive (hands on) assistance with daily incontinence care (if
                   continence is otherwise age appropriate) or with daily catheter or ostomy care.
                   Child should achieve daytime continence by age 3.

              * If the individual meets the Service Needs Requirement, but no Functional Deficit exists, the case must
                be referred to the CLTC Central office for special review and determination of medical necessity.

              ** For children 0-5 years of age, use the Level of Care Users Guide’s Developmental Guide to determine
                 age-appropriate activity.




                                                                                                             Page 19
