Division of Long Term Living
Documentation Policy and Procedure                                                  March 2019

                                           Documentation Policy

             This policy applies to all Community Long Term Care waivers and programs.

             The accountability of the CLTC Representative/Worker and the program must be
             assured through appropriate documentation and data collection. Documentation is
             an integral part of effective pre-admission screening activity and case management.
             Documentation should adhere to professional standards. Documentation is required
             to record any case activity in accordance to policy and procedures. Appropriate
             documentation is mandatory.

             Documentation provides an accurate record of all case activities and actions. All
             documentation is a legal record that may be used as evidence in court.
             Documentation is also required to ensure organizational and worker compliance.

                 •   Documentation should be related to the participant and should reflect
                     factual information recorded in a professional manner.

                 •   Use only agency approved abbreviations. Refer to the Approved
                     Abbreviation List Appendix II.

                 •   Correct spelling and proper grammar must be used.

                 •   Extraneous comments unrelated to the participant’s situation are not
                     appropriate for inclusion in the case record.

                 •   Personal opinions and judgmental statements are not appropriate for the
                     participant record.

                 •   Emails are not appropriate for the participant record.

                 •   Quality assurance reviews/forms must not be filed in the participant record.


             These standards for documentation apply to all correspondence and to ALL
             documentation in the Phoenix system. Narrative checklists and Conversations are
             part of the narrative record.

             If participant information is documented somewhere in the participant record, it
             does not have to be repeated.

             When reporting a complaint in Phoenix, the report must include, if appropriate, the




                                                     Appendix I - Documentation             Page 1
Division of Long Term Living
Documentation Policy and Procedure                                                    March 2019

             CLTC number, name of provider, name of provider worker, and provider worker
             ID.

             The Conversation Tab feature may be used rather than contacting the provider by
             telephone. Examples of appropriate uses of Conversation are informing the provider
             of a schedule change, hospitalization, etc. However, when informing the provider
             of information that requires immediate attention such as an immediate termination,
             a telephone call for verbal communication is necessary. All documentation policies
             apply to the Conversation Tab feature in Phoenix. Correct spelling, proper grammar
             and approved abbreviations must be utilized.

             It is extremely important to document any data regarding participant problems or
             needs. Follow up documentation is to be included, as appropriate. If a need is
             identified in the narrative, any subsequent actions taken on the participant’s behalf
             are to be included in the narrative. All contacts made with the participant or on the
             participant’s behalf must be narrated. Documentation must be kept current. All
             contacts and actions must be narrated within 3 business days of the activity unless
             a shorter period of time is otherwise specified in policy and procedures, contracts,
             or other official SCDHHS communications.

             The date noted in the “Date of Contact” field in the narrative must be the date the
             activity or contact was completed. The date of the contact may also be entered in
             the text of the narrative. However, this is not mandatory since the “Date of Contact”
             field denotes the date that the contact was made. The date the documentation is
             entered will automatically be recorded by Phoenix.

             Narrative documentation indicating activities completed over several days are not
             appropriate. Activities completed on a specific date should be documented
             indicating the appropriate date of contact. For example, if case activity was
             completed on July 6th and July 7th, and is being narrated on July 7th, the worker will
             enter one narrative with a date of contact of July 6th and a separate narrative with a
             date of contact of July 7th.

             All waiver documentation for the month must be keyed, entered and uploaded to
             the network by 11:59 pm of the last day of each month. This supersedes any
             documentation timeliness and policy guidelines. For example, documentation
             related to re-evaluations completed the last week of the month but not due until the
             first week of the following month, must be completed by 11:59 pm of the month
             the visit was completed.

             When counting days for timeliness standard issues, the first day is determined to be
             the next business or calendar day depending on the standard. For example, the
             timeliness standard for documentation is three business days. For an activity that




                                                     Appendix I - Documentation             Page 2
Division of Long Term Living
Documentation Policy and Procedure                                                    March 2019

             occurred on a business day Monday, Day One (1) would be Tuesday. Day Two (2)
             would be Wednesday. Day Three (3) would be Thursday. Therefore, the activity
             must be documented by 11:59 pm on Day Three (3), Thursday. For an activity that
             occurred on a business day Friday, Day One (1) would be Monday. Day Two (2)
             would be Tuesday. Day Three (3) would be Wednesday. Therefore, the activity
             must be documented by 11:59 pm on Day Three (3), Wednesday. However, all
             documentation for the month must be keyed, entered and uploaded to the network
             by 11:59 pm of the last day of each month regardless of timeliness standards.

             Any item requiring prior approval must be documented in the individual’s Phoenix
             record.

             The first and last name and title, if applicable, of any person from whom
             information is received must be documented in the narrative. The primary contact
             and the physician are to be identified by first and last name in the narrative, as the
             individuals assuming these roles may change over time.

             A fax copy of a document may be accepted and suffice for documentation in the
             record if legible. The original must be scanned into Phoenix Scans. If a document
             is faxed to someone, there is no need to follow-up with an original by mail. Routing
             methods such as mail or fax should be used when Phoenix is not an option.

             All documents that are not available in Phoenix are to be scanned to the participant’s
             Phoenix file. All scanned documents are to be stored under the appropriate scan tag
             in Phoenix Scans. Refer to the “Scan Tag Descriptions” document in Phoenix HELP
             to determine the appropriate scan tag for document placement.

             All documents received from outside sources, such as Physician’s orders, Nursing
             Facility supporting documentation packets, etc., are to be scanned in the
             participant’s Phoenix file by 11:59 pm on the last day of each month unless the
             document is received within the last three business days of the month. In this
             situation, the document should be scanned in the participant’s Phoenix file by the
             5th day of the following month.

             Packets of supporting medical records and documentation received in conjunction
             with a level of care request from a hospital, nursing home or TEFRA coordinator
             may be scanned as one packet in Phoenix scans under the appropriate scan tag. The
             Consent Form and Participant Service Choice Form will be separated from the
             packet and scanned under the designated scan tags.

             If hard copy Consent Forms or Participant Service Choice Forms are obtained for
             any reason, these forms must be scanned into the appropriate tag in Phoenix scans
             within three business days.




                                                     Appendix I - Documentation             Page 3
Division of Long Term Living
Documentation Policy and Procedure                                                  March 2019


             For the enrolled waiver participant, the hard copy form will be retained until the
             next quarterly visit at which time the scanned document is confirmed to be present
             and readable in Phoenix Scans under the appropriate scan tag. For all other types of
             applications, the hard copy form will be disposed of when the scanned document is
             confirmed to be present and readable in Phoenix Scans under the appropriate scan
             tag.

             SCDHHS employees must properly dispose of all participant related hard copy
             forms in the locked bins located in each Area Office. All providers must follow
             their agency’s HIPAA record disposal policy.

             When paper forms are necessary, black ink should be used.

             All communication between CLTC Representatives/workers and participants,
             primary contacts, providers and other related agencies must be through verbal
             information exchange during face-to-face visits or by phone, mail or by fax.
             Electronic methods such as texting, emailing, tweeting, etc. are not permitted.




                                                    Appendix I - Documentation            Page 4
Division of Long Term Living
Documentation Policy and Procedure                                                      March 2019

  Documentation Retention Policy



  1.0    Purpose

         The purpose of this policy is to provide a system for complying with document retention
         laws to ensure that necessary records and documents are adequately protected and
         maintained as well as to ensure that records that are no longer needed or are of no value
         are discarded appropriately.


  2.0    Policy Details

         The South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services (SCDHHS) has the
         following requirements related to record retention. “Medical records shall be retained
         for a period of five (5) years after the last payment was made for services rendered,
         except that hospitals and nursing homes are required to retain such records for six (6)
         years after the last payment was made for services rendered.” Additionally, “if litigation,
         claim, audit, or other action involving the records has been initiated prior to the expiration
         of the appropriate retention period, the records shall be retained until completion of the
         action and resolution of all issues which arise from it or until the end of the appropriate
         retention period, whichever is later.”

         The Division of Long-Term Living (DLTL) maintains compliance with this policy by the
         maintenance of participants’ records in our case management system known as Phoenix.

         Therefore, this policy is intended to assist area offices in the retention of any hard copy
         files located onsite. This policy is applicable to records of any applicant or participant in
         a CLTC waiver, Children’s Personal Care program, TEFRA, or Nursing Home
         (preadmission or conversion).


                     Documents that Should be Maintained in Hard Copy
         •   Any document that is within the five (5) year retention period or six (6) years if it is
             nursing home documentation AND is not located in Phoenix. Some examples include
             but are not limited to:
                 o Participant correspondences
                 o Doctor correspondences
                 o DDSN Service Plans
                 o Other documents received from an external source that is not located in
                     Phoenix.

         •   Any document in which the retention period has expired but there is a litigation,
             claim, audit, or other action involving the record. In this case, the record must be
             maintained until completion of the action and resolution of all issues which arise from
             it.
                                                      Appendix I - Documentation              Page 5
Division of Long Term Living
Documentation Policy and Procedure                                                  March 2019

  Maintenance of Hard Copy Records/Documentation

  In an effort to go paperless, any documents/records that must be maintained should be scanned
  into Phoenix using the appropriate scan tags. The hard copy documentation should be shredded.
  If an appropriate scan tag is not available, scan the document under “Other forms/Documents.”

  Note: Staff members should verify that a legible copy of the document is in Phoenix prior to the
  shredding of the documentation.

  Documents that May be Shredded
         •   Any document in which the retention period has expired and there is no litigation,
             claim, audit, or other action involving the record.

         •   Any document within the retention period and the staff member can verify that a
             legible copy of the documentation is located in Phoenix. Some examples include but
             are not limited to:

                 o   Authorizations
                 o   Provider Choice Forms
                 o   CLTC Notification Forms
                 o   Consent and Rights and Responsibilities Forms
                 o   CLTC Assessments
                 o   CLTC Service Plans
                 o   PASRR
                 o   Certification Letters




                                                    Appendix I - Documentation            Page 6
