SOUTH CAROLINA ASSESSMENT & LEVEL OF CARE MANUAL

                      FOR

  MEDICAID-SPONSORED LONG TERM CARE SERVICES
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

Determination of medical necessity for Medicaid-sponsored long term care services is an
important function. In order to assure that those persons who need long term care
services receive them, there must be a thorough screening process. It is through this
process that a written evaluation is conducted of an individual's medical, psychosocial,
functional, environmental, support system and service needs. Following this evaluation,
a recommendation can be made about the most appropriate, least restrictive
environment where care can be provided to meet the individual's assessed needs.

As the state Medicaid agency, the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) is
responsible by law for the development, promulgation, and oversight of criteria for
determining medical necessity for both institutional and home and community-based
long term care services.

This Assessment and Level of Care Manual for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care
Services contains the following documents:

               •      South Carolina Level of Care Criteria for Medicaid-Sponsored Long
                      Term Care

               •      South Carolina Long Term Care Assessment Form (DHHS Form
                      1718)

               •      South Carolina Long Term Care Assessment Form User's Guide

Each of these tools have been carefully linked to one another in their application and
use. Therefore, in order to effectively evaluate a long term care applicant, one must
have a complete knowledge of all three and understand how each is relevant to the
others.

For more information about the manual, call the Department of Health and Human
Services' Division of Community Long Term Care (CLTC) at (803) 253-6142 or your local
CLTC Area Office or write to:

                      State of South Carolina
                      Department of Health and Human Services
                      Division of Community Long Term Care
                      Post Office Box 8206
                      Columbia, South Carolina 29202-8206



Revised November 1, 1995                         2
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

                         South Carolina Level of Care Criteria
                                         for
                         Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care



Eligibility for Medicaid-sponsored long term care in South Carolina consists of meeting
established criteria. In addition to meeting general, categorical, and financial eligibility
requirements, an individual must also meet medical or psychobehavioral and functional
requirements as determined by a screening process.

During the screening process, a comprehensive assessment of the applicant is obtained
using a standardized instrument. The attached level of care criteria are applied to
determine whether an individual is eligible for skilled or intermediate care.

The criteria describe the minimum services and functional deficits necessary to qualify
for Medicaid-sponsored long term care. The criteria are listed under two headings,
skilled and intermediate. An individual is determined to be at a skilled or intermediate
level of care upon meeting the criteria. Because no set of criteria can adequately
describe all the possible circumstances, a knowledge of an individual's particular
situation is essential in applying these criteria.




Revised November 1, 1995                         3
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

                                    Skilled Level of Care



A person must need at least one of the numbered skilled services (Items 1-11, adapted
from the Medicare requirements at 42 C.F.R. 409.32-35 [1993]) and have at least one
of the numbered functional deficits listed below to qualify for skilled level of care. A
person needing item #12 by itself qualifies for skilled level of care because this
represents a total care individual. In order to qualify as a skilled service, the service
must be ordered by a physician, require the skills of professional or technical personnel,
and be furnished directly by or under the supervision of such personnel [42 C.F.R.
409.31-35 (1993).] The need for skilled services must be clearly documented in the
client's record.


Skilled Services

1.     Daily monitoring/observation and assessment due to an unstable medical
       condition which may include overall management and evaluation of a care plan
       which changes daily or several times a week.

2.     Administration of medications which require frequent dosage adjustment,
       regulation, and monitoring.

3.     Administration of parenteral medications and fluids which require frequent
       dosage adjustment, regulation, and monitoring. (Routine injection(s) scheduled
       daily or less frequently [such as insulin injection] do not qualify.)

4.     Special catheter care (e.g., frequent irrigation, irrigation with special medications,
       frequent catheterizations for specific problems.)

5.     Treatment of extensive decubitus ulcers or other widespread skin disorder.
       (Important considerations include: Signs of infections, full thickness tissue loss,
       or requirement of sterile technique)

6.     A single goal-directed rehabilitative service (speech, physical, or occupational
       therapy) by a therapist 5 days per week. Combinations of therapies will satisfy
       this requirement.

7.     Time-limited, goal-directed, educational services provided by professional or

Revised November 1, 1995                         4
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

       technical personnel to teach self maintenance, such as education for newly-
       diagnosed or acute episodic conditions (e.g., medications, treatments,
       procedures).

8.     Nasogastric tube or gastrostomy feedings.

9.     Nasopharyngeal or tracheostomy aspirations or sterile tracheostomy care.

10.    Administration of medical gases (e.g., oxygen) for the initial phase of condition
       requiring such treatment, monitoring, and evaluation (generally no longer than
       two week duration).

11.    Daily skilled monitoring or observation for conditions that do not ordinarily
       require skilled care, but because of the combination of conditions, may result in
       special medical complications. In these situations, the complications and the
       skilled services required must be documented.

12.    This individual is totally dependent in all activities of daily living: incapable of
       locomotion; unable to transfer; totally incontinent of urinary or bowel function;
       must be totally bathed and dressed and toileted and need extensive assistance to
       eat.


Functional Deficits

1.     Requires extensive assistance (hands-on) with dressing and toileting and eating,
       and physical help in bathing. (All four must be present and, together, they
       constitute one deficit.)




Revised November 1, 1995                         5
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services



2.     Requires extensive assistance (hands-on) with locomotion.

3.     Requires extensive assistance (hands-on) to transfer.

4.     Requires frequent (hands on) bladder or bowel incontinence care; or with daily
       catheter or ostomy care.

Note: It may be determined that an individual without a required functional deficit has
special medical needs. In such cases, the individual may have a skilled medical need
that warrants on-going treatment and management, which can best be addressed with
skilled nursing services.as outlined under skilled services (Pages 5-6, #1-11). These
cases must be referred to the State Health and Human Services Finance Commission,
Division of Community Long Term Care, for special review to determine the level of
care.




Revised November 1, 1995                         6
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services




Revised November 1, 1995                         7
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

                                Intermediate Level of Care



A person can meet the intermediate level of care criteria in either of two ways:

1.     by requiring at least one of the four numbered intermediate services listed below
       and having one of the numbered functional deficits listed below;
                                            OR

2.     by having at least two of the numbered functional deficits listed below.

Intermediate Services

1.     Daily monitoring of a significant medical condition requiring overall care planning
       in order to maintain optimum health status. The individual should manifest a
       documented need which warrants such monitoring.

2.     Supervision of moderate/severe memory, either long or short term, manifested
       by disorientation, bewilderment, and forgetfulness which requires significant
       intervention in overall care planing.

3.     Supervision of moderately impaired cognitive skills manifested by decisions which
       may reasonably be expected to affect an individual's own safety.

4.     Supervision of moderate problem behavior manifested by verbal abusiveness,
       physical abusiveness, or socially inappropriate/disruptive behavior.

Functional Deficits

1.     Requires extensive assistance (hands-on) with dressing and toileting and eating
       and physical help in bathing. (All four must be present and, together, they
       constitute one deficit.)

2.     Requires extensive assistance (hands-on) with locomotion.

3.     Requires extensive assistance (hands-on) to transfer.

4.     Requires frequent (hands on) with bladder or bowel incontinent care; or with
       daily catheter or ostomy care.

Revised November 1, 1995                         8
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

                                South Carolina
                        Long Term Care Assessment Form
                                 User's Guide


The South Carolina Long Term Care Assessment Form (DHHS Form 1718) is designed
to gather necessary information about the medical, psychosocial, and functional status
of a person to determine:

       1.      the level of care required to receive long term care services in a nursing
               facility or in a community setting and,

       2.      service planning needs for community cases.

It is the intent that each individual being evaluated for Medicaid-sponsored long term
care be aware an application is being made and to be involved if possible in the
assessment process.

The CLTC Consent Form (DHHS Form 121) must be read and signed before a nurse
consultant can take any official action on the assessment. The form must be signed by
a responsible relative only when the client is not competent or is physically unable to do
so.

The assessment information should be obtained through an interview with and
observation of the person being assessed (client). Other sources of information such as
family members and medical records should be utilized as necessary.

Professional judgment is used in rating the individual's medical, psychobehavioral, and
functional abilities.

The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 requires states' Pre-Admission
Screening programs and the Minimum Data Set to be coordinated so as to avoid
duplication. The instruments (Form 1718 and the Resident Assessment Instrument) are
similar and will allow the state to develop a statewide long term care data base for both
nursing facility and community based clients.

The Form 1718 will be required for pre-admission screening for Medicaid-sponsorship of
nursing facility care, nursing facility conversions in payment source (from Medicare, VA,
private pay, etc.) to Medicaid, and referral to all CLTC waiver programs


Revised November 1, 1995                         9
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

(Elderly/Disabled Waiver, HIV/AIDS Waiver, etc.)


The 1718 has been cross-referenced to the Resident Assessment Instrument. The
"codes" in each of the major lettered sections of the 1718 correspond to a similar
section of the Resident Assessment Instrument. This will help nursing facility staff in
the transfer of the corresponding codes from the 1718 to the Resident Assessment
Instrument for new admissions. This will also provide a good base line for a resident
new to the facility and staff. Use of the 1718 will further expedite the resident
assessment and give base information to complete the Resident Assessment Instrument
within the required 14 days. The 1718 will also provide pertinent information about the
resident prior to institutionalization. Secondly, the 1718 will help the nursing facility
with conversion cases. The cross-referenced codes will be used to transfer data that is
unchanged from the Resident Assessment Instrument to the 1718.




Revised November 1, 1995                        10
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

              Instructions for Completing the South Carolina
                    Long Term Care Assessment Form


Black ink should be used to complete the Assessment Form, DHHS Form 1718. If the
assessor is unable to obtain the information requested in an item, this should be noted
in the appropriate comment section. Please remember that any missing information
may delay the admission review process.

Instructions are given for completing each page. The 1718 has five sections These
sections are as follows:

       Section I.     Identifying/Demographic Information
       Section II.    Medical Information
       Section III.   Functional Information
       Section IV.    Psychobehavioral Information
       Section V.     Environmental/Client Outcome Information

All comments should be dated to correspond with the appropriate assessment date.

Start with Column A initially and use Columns B, C, D, and E as changes and re-
evaluations occur.

Completion of Section V is for use by CLTC staff only.

The Assessment Form must be completed by a nurse, social worker, social services
worker, or physician. The nurse coordinator for resident assessments is encouraged to
complete this form.

It is the intent that each individual being evaluated for Medicaid-sponsored long term
care be aware the application is being made and be as involved as possible in the
assessment process. The assessment information should be obtained through an
interview with and observation of the person being assessed (client). Other sources of
information such as family members and medical records should be utilized as
necessary. It may be appropriate to have the client demonstrate functional ability.

The Mental Status Questionnaire (Section IV, Part N) should be completed early in the
assessment process to assist in the determination of the client's cognitive state and an
ability to provide accurate assessment information. The skilled assessor may


Revised November 1, 1995                        11
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

incorporate the questions of the MSQ while gathering other assessment information
such as demographic data.
The assessment form (DHHS Form 1718) can be ordered by submitting a Request for
Medicaid Forms and Publications (DHHS Form 142), or by a written request to:

       Department of Health and Human Services
       Post Office Box 8206
       Columbia, South Carolina 29202-8206
       Attention: Support Services Supply Room




Revised November 1, 1995                        12
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

             South Carolina Long Term Care Assessment Form
                               User's Guide



Section I - Identifying/Demographic Information

These pages can serve as a referral form for clients seeking home and community-
based services when submitted separately without the accompanying pages. If
information cannot be obtained for a section, reference these items in the general
comments (Section V of the 1718). Gray shaded areas are to be completed by
CLTC staff only.

1.     Application Date - date the referral is processed.
2.     Intake Manager Code - assigned code of nurse consultant intake worker.
3.     Reason for Referral - select the appropriate category; if for conversion, put the
       requested effective date.
4.     Permanent Client Information - fill out completely; use the four digit number
       for year of birth; if the information is unknown, leave blank.
5.     Present Location - indicate where the person is when the referral is made,
       e.g., hospital, nursing facility, home, residential care facility; if present location is
       the same as permanent, indicate by marking "same as above" box. Note:
       Directions only need to be completed on a person located in the community.
6.     Responsible Party - A family member or other individual actively involved in
       client's care.
7.     Demographic - choose appropriate categories.
8.     Referral Type - choose appropriate choice.
9.     Referral Mode - choose appropriate choice.
10.    Intake Met - choose appropriate choice.
11.    Reason for Referral - Indicate functional dependency or other reason for
       referral.
12.    Referral Source - complete all sections.
13.    Referral Location - Indicate where the client is located at the time of the
       referral.
14.    Assessment Referred To - Indicate who is to complete the 1718.
15.    Physician Information - give the name of the physician responsible for
       continuing care in the community or nursing facility; this may be a different
       physician than the one caring for the client while in the hospital.
16.    Financial - complete appropriately.


Revised November 1, 1995                        13
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

17.    Signature - Signature of person completing Section I of the 1718. (Note: only
       a nurse, social worker, social services worker, or physician may complete and
       sign this form.)




Revised November 1, 1995                        14
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

Section II - Medical Information

This section contains current information on diagnoses, stability of condition, abnormal
data, treatments and therapies, nutritional/diet regime, medications and height/weight.

A.     Diagnoses - categorized in the following groups:

               Heart/Circulation
               Sensory
               Neurological
               Psychiatric/Mood
               Pulmonary
               Skin Condition
               Other
               HIV/AIDS

       Coding: Indicate only the diseases present that have a relationship to current
       ADL status, medical treatments, or risk of death. Do not include conditions that
       have been resolved or no longer affect the client's functioning or care plan.

               Example 1:

               Code 1 = current/new (example: Diabetes Mellitus or if client has had
               CVA and has residual effect.)

               Example 2:

               Code 2 = discontinued/past history not currently treated (example:
               Pneumonia)

               Example 3:

               If a client is a quadriplegic as a result of a head injury, indicate a "1" by
               the diagnosis of head injury and quadriplegia.




Revised November 1, 1995                        15
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

       Skin Condition: If the client has decubiti, indicate "yes" or "no", then indicate
       the stage in the columns as 1, 2, 3, or 4.

               Stage 1 - A persistent area of skin redness (without a break in the skin)
               that does not disappear when pressure is relieved.
               Stage 2 - A partial thickness loss of skin layers that presents clinically as
               an abrasion, blister, or shallow crater.
               Stage 3 - A full thickness of skin loss, exposing the subcutaneous tissues;
               presents as a deep crater with or without undermining adjacent tissue.
               Stage 4 - A full thickness of skin and subcutaneous tissue is lost, exposing
               muscle and bone.

       Note: If the client has more than one decubiti, put the stage of the worst in the
       column and describe others in general comments.

       Other: There is space available to indicate any allergies at the time of the initial
       assessment since these are not likely to change or need updating.

       For any diagnoses not listed, use the "aaa-Other" area. Please write in the
       diagnoses in the space provided.

       If the client is diagnosed with AIDS, indicate "bbb". If the client is HIV+, mark
       "ccc" and list the specific related conditions reported on the lines below. The
       most recent CD4 count should be indicated.

B.     Stability of Condition

       The intent of this item is to determine the current health status in relation to
       diseases/conditions present during the last 7 days, noting whether the client
       experiences an unstable condition and/or an acute condition episode or a flare-
       up of a recurrent/chronic problem.

       Coding: Check all that apply during the last 7 days. If none apply, check item
       "C-None of the Above".

       Examples: The item A should be used for a diabetic who requires daily or more
       frequent blood sugar tests in conjunction with administering sliding-scale insulin
       dosages. This client becomes confused when hypoglycemic. If this same client
       had pneumonia at the time of assessment, code item A for Unstable and item B
       for Acute. If a diabetic receives NPH Insulin 20 units sq QAM, requires monthly

Revised November 1, 1995                        16
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

       blood sugar determinations, and has no current acute illness, code item C-None
       of the Above.

C.     Abnormal Data

       The intent of this item is to record whether the client had any known abnormal
       data, either lab data (i.e., blood sugar, drug levels) or abnormal vital signs during
       the prior 90-day period. The abnormal lab data refer to lab values that are
       abnormal when compared to standard values, not abnormal for the specific
       client.

       Coding: Use the space provided to record any abnormalities and date each
       entry.

       If no abnormal data is known, indicate in field "n/a".

D.     Treatments and Therapies

       The intent of this section is to identify the frequency of all treatments and
       therapies that the client is receiving.

       Coding: Frequency codes are provided in the Section H-Medications. If the
       client receives no treatments or therapies, check item U-None of the Above.

       For any treatments or therapies not listed, use the "T-Other" area and specify in
       the comments field any additions in the space provided.

E.     Nutritional Approaches and Special Diets

       The intent of this item is to identify nutritional approaches and specify special
       dietary needs.

       Coding: Check all that apply in the appropriate alphabetical column. If the
       client receives no special nutritional approaches or special diet, check item T-
       None of the Above.

       For any nutritional approaches or special diet not listed, use the "S-Other" area.
       Please annotate any additions in the space provided.

       Note: Wasting indicates a general debilitating, weak state characterized by a

Revised November 1, 1995                        17
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

       weight loss of greater than 10% in the last 60 days and resulting in a noticeable
       loss of muscle tone. This may be caused by an underlying disease state, i.e.,
       HIV, cancer. Comment on weight gain or loss as appropriate in the comments
       section.
       Nutritional Screening: This section must be completed on an applicant
       applying for CCM (E/D, HIV, Vent) upon the initial evaluation and re-evaluation.
       Completion is optional for other applicants (NH, TEFRA, etc.) Indicate all that
       apply to the applicant. For questions 3, 9, and 10, if any of the phrases are
       indicated, the entire amount of points are assigned. CMS will automatically score
       this section. The comment section can be used as needed.

F.     Skin

       The intent of this item is to record the client's current skin condition. Check as
       appropriate.

G.     Height/Weight

       Initially code the height and weight. On updates and reassessments, record only
       the weight, since height is not likely to vary for adults. Height and weight should
       be recorded on re-evaluations of clients less than 18 years old.

       Note: For bilateral amputees, use pre-op height.

H.     Medications

       The intent of this item is to record the client's current medication use.

       Coding: List the name and dosage of each drug the client is currently taking,
       followed by the route of administration and frequency (refer to the codes on the
       assessment). There is also a column for the discontinuation date of medications
       previously recorded on the form that are no longer current. If over eight
       medications are listed, complete Page 10 of the 1718. If more explanation is
       needed, annotate in the comments section.

       There is an area to be used to annotate any medication which requires frequent
       monitoring or adjustment. Code O if "no" and Code 1 if "yes". If "yes" is coded,
       describe in the space provided.

Grid

Revised November 1, 1995                        18
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services



This section should be completed by the assessor to indicate the date, the assessor's
initials and the source of the medical information, utilizing the source codes provided on
the form. The initial assessment will be completed using Column A. All subsequent
updates and reassessments should be recorded in the next available alphabetical grid.
Signature

The initial assessor should also sign the form and complete the space to indicate his/her
title and the date Section II was completed.


Section III - Functional Information

I.     Activities of Daily Living Coding Instructions

       In this section, the client's self-care performance in activities of daily living is
       evaluated. Use the ADL Self-Performance categories at the top of page 8 to
       code the ADL's: transfer, locomotion, dressing, eating, and toilet use. Separate
       coding categories are used for bathing and continence. The ADL self-
       performance categories measure what the client actually did without assistance
       in the last 7-14 days, indicating balance between client's self-performance and
       assistance caregivers provided for each activity. The assessor should use
       professional judgment to determine if the last 7-14 days are representative of
       the client's overall ADL ability. Note that codes 0, 1, 2, 3 permit one or two
       exceptions where heavier care is provided. This "exception" aspect of ADL codes
       is useful to ensure that the client is not assigned to an excessively dependent
       category and to increase the likelihood that the ADL items will be coded
       consistently and accurately.

       Definitions for each of the ADL categories are included on the 1718 to guide the
       assessor when evaluating the client's performance in each category. Use the
       Comments Section to clarify or describe situations, as needed.

       Note: To determine the applicable functional description for children under
       eighteen, the reviewer should refer to the attached guide of developmental
       stages of children. Code each functional activity with regard to age
       appropriateness. Example: A 3-month old cannot ambulate. The reviewer
       would code as "O" and comment "inability to ambulate is age appropriate".

       Codes

Revised November 1, 1995                        19
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services



               Independent - Indicates the client is totally capable of completing the
               activity without assistance. The client can also be coded as "0" if the
               client received minor assistance or supervision only one or two times over
               the past 7 days due to special circumstances, but completed the activity
               independently all other times for that week. Example: Mr. U goes out
               one day a week to visit with family and returns in a fatigued state. He
               then requires help undressing prior to going to bed. He required no help
               that morning in dressing, and was fully self-sufficient on all other days in
               dressing and undressing. Thus, over the 7-day assessment period, Mr. U
               was fully self-sufficient 13 times and required hands-on help one time.
               Based on careful clinical review, the ADL codes permit this resident to be
               coded "O" for "Independent" in dressing.

               Supervision: Indicates the client is capable of completing the activity
               independently with only supervision, cuing (reminders), or
               encouragement. Note: For continuous step by step instruction - see
               Extensive Assistance.

               The client can also be coded a "1" if receiving Supervision and Limited
               Assistance (see code #2) only one or two times during the last 7 days, but
               completed the activity independently with only oversight, encouragement,
               or cuing (reminders) all other times for that week.

               Limited Assistance - Indicates the client is capable of completing the
               activity with only minor assistance from caregivers.

               The client can also be coded a "2" if the client received extensive
               assistance (see code #3) less than 50% of the time, but was capable of
               completing the activity with only minor assistance all other times for that
               week.

               Extensive Assistance - Indicates the client can complete part of the activity
               but needs human assistance (hands-on) or verbal directions (continuous
               step by step direction) in relation to the activity 50% or more of the time.

               The client can also be coded a "3" if receiving total assistance with the
               activity less than 50% of the time, but was capable of completing part of
               the activity all other times for that week. (Indicates hands-on assistance
               needed at least 50% of the time.)

Revised November 1, 1995                        20
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services



               Total Dependence - Indicates the client was totally unable to assist in the
               activity all 7 days.




Revised November 1, 1995                        21
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

       Definitions
             Transfer

               Indicates how the client moves between surfaces, i.e. to/from bed, chair,
               wheelchair, standing position (excludes to/from toileting.)

               0-    Independent - Indicates total independence in transferring. If an
                     assistive device is used, the type of device should be identified in the
                     comments section.

               1-    Supervision - Indicates that even though the person is independent
                     is transferring, standby supervision and/or direction is necessary for
                     safety.

               2-    Limited Assistance - Indicates direction or guidance is needed for
                     correct positioning of limbs/appliances (, sliding board), for safety,
                     but client can transfer self.

               3-    Extensive Assistance - Indicates hands-on assistance or
                     continuous step by step direction is necessary for transfer; weight
                     bearing includes few weight bearing steps with pivot.

               4-    Total Dependence - Indicates transfer requires total human
                     support; non-weight bearing or only able to pivot.

               If during the assessment, a transfer deficit is the only identified self-
               performance problem, the effects of the transfer deficit on all other
               activities of daily living should be carefully evaluated. Example: If the
               client uses a lift chair, assess the ability to transfer from bed, toilet, etc.

               Locomotion

               Includes ambulation and wheelchair (electric or manually propelled)
               performance. A client's environment should be considered when
               evaluating this ADL. A client's endurance should be considered when
               evaluating ability to walk or propel a wheelchair.

               0-    Independent - Indicates total independence in walking, in
                     wheelchair, or in motor cart (i.e., client who is completely mobile in
                     electric wheelchair). If an assisting device is used, the type of

Revised November 1, 1995                        22
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

                     device should be identified in the comment section (i.e., walker,
                     cane).
               1-    Supervision - With or without assistive device indicates intermittent
                     supervision may be needed with ambulation or wheelchair use.
                     Example: Slow gait but steady.

               2-    Limited Assistance - Indicates guidance is needed for correct
                     positioning of limbs/appliances (e.g., braces, prosthesis) or
                     assistance is needed in difficult wheelchair/ambulation maneuvers
                     (awkward thresholds, crowded areas, elevators/stairs, uneven
                     pavement, outside) or for safety with ambulation/wheelchair. The
                     client has the capacity to ambulate or propel wheelchair
                     independently to a destination (more than 20 feet).

               3-    Extensive Assistance - Indicates the need for physical assistance with
                     ambulation; this need, including unsteadiness with ambulation,
                     assistance with the application of a brace or prothesis without which
                     a client could not walk. If a client is wheelchair bound, indicates
                     physical or verbal support is needed for wheelchair use.

                     It also indicates necessary extensive continuous verbal/hands-on
                     direction to prevent wandering, whether because of the client's
                     habitual tendency or his/her inability to find strategic locations (i.e.,
                     bathroom, dining room). Definition: Wandering indicates non-goal
                     directed locomotion.

               4-    Total Dependence - Indicates a client's total inability for walking,
                     even though the ability remains to stand and bear weight or, if
                     wheelchair bound, indicates total inability to operate or manually
                     propel the wheelchair.

               Dressing

               Assessment should focus on the client's ability to dress self.

               0-    Independent - Indicates the client is totally capable of dressing
                     without assistance.

               1-    Supervision - Indicates oversight or reminders are needed for
                     dressing.

Revised November 1, 1995                        23
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services



               2-    Limited Assistance - Indicates help is needed with zippers,
                     buttons, shoes, laying out of clothes, etc.


               3-    Extensive Assistance - Indicates the client needs physical
                     assistance or continuous verbal step by step directions in relation to
                     appropriate dressing at least 50% of the time.

                     Such assistance may be needed by a client who frequently dresses
                     inappropriately for the physical environment (i.e., many layers of
                     clothes when the temperature does not warrant them).

               4-    Total Dependence - Indicates the client must be dressed by
                     others.


               Eating

               Code appropriately relative to the activities the client is capable of
               accomplishing within a reasonable length of time for a meal. The amount
               of food consumed in order to ensure adequate nutritional intake should
               also be considered.

               Outside a long term care facility, "setting up the meal" is defined as a
               person's ability to take prepared food, warm it and serve it for eating.
               Since these activities would not be appropriate in nursing facilities or
               residential care facilities due to licensing and certification standards, staff
               of the facility should evaluate the client's ability to accomplish these
               activities.

               0-    Independent - Indicates no assistance is needed in setting up and
                     eating the meal. Setting up the meal is defined as a person's ability
                     to take prepared food, warm it, and serve it for eating.

               1-    Supervision - Indicates oversight or reminders are needed for meal
                     preparation and/or to eat meals.

               2-    Limited Assistance - Indicates help is needed in cutting meat,
                     opening prepackaged items, and so forth.

Revised November 1, 1995                        24
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services



               3-    Extensive Assistance - Indicates the need for physical assistance
                     with or continuous step by step directions pertaining to eating and/or
                     setting up the meal at least 50% of the time.

               4-    Total Dependence - Indicates the client is totally dependent on
                     another for feeding.
               Toilet Use

               Indicate how the client uses the toilet (i.e. commode, bedpan, urinal):
               transfer on/off toilet, cleanses, changes pad, manages ostomy or catheter,
               adjusts clothes.

               If bowel/bladder training is in progress, indicate this in the comment
               section of the continence section. If toileting is done at bedside, using
               bedpan or commode, indicate in the comments section if the client has
               any measure of independence.

               0-    Independent - Indicates that no assistance is required for toileting.

               1-    Supervision - Indicates oversight is needed for safety in toileting.

               2-    Limited Assistance - Indicates help is needed with arranging
                     clothes or emptying bedpan/bedside commode.

               3-    Extensive Assistance - Indicates routine physical or continuous
                     step by step direction for transfer and/or personal hygiene. This
                     may include a person who frequently toilets in inappropriate places
                     (i.e., floor vents, dresser drawers).

               4-    Total Dependence - Indicates total assistance.

               Bathing

               This activity rates the maximum amount of physical assistance the client
               requires in order to achieve safe and adequate hygiene. Code the
               maximum amount of assistance client receives. Physical help in part of
               bathing activity (washing off) indicates that client needs assistance in a
               part of the bathing activity at least 50% of the time (excludes washing of
               back and hair.)

Revised November 1, 1995                        25
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services



               0-    Independent - Indicates no physical assistance or direction is
                     needed with routine daily bathing.

               1-    Supervision - Indicates standby oversight or supervision is
                     necessary to ensure safety and completion, regardless of method of
                     bathing.


               2-    Physical Help Limited to Transfer Only - Indicates physical
                     assistance is needed to move from one surface to another (example:
                     getting in and out of tub/shower), but no assistance is needed with
                     bathing activity or assistance needed less than 50% of the time
                     (excludes washing of back and hair).

               3-    Physical Help in Part of Bathing Activity - Indicates necessity
                     hands on physical assistance or continuous step by step direction is
                     needed in bathing 50% or more of the time (excludes washing of
                     back and hair).

               4-    Total Dependence - Indicates total hands-on assistance is required
                     in bathing.

               Continence

               These categories are to be used to code the pattern of bladder and bowel
               continence/control during the last 14-day period. Use the codes provided
               on the 1718, Page 8-Continence.

               0-    Indicates complete control. Note: This would be counted as a
                     deficit when indwelling catheter is in place and not self care.

               1-    For bladder-Indicates incontinent episodes once a week or less; For
                     bowel-Indicates less than weekly

               2-    For bladder-Indicates 2+ times a week but not daily; For bowel-
                     Indicates once a week.

               3-    For bladder-Indicates frequent incontinence, but some control, OR if
                     the client is being toileted (extensive assistance) on a regular basis,

Revised November 1, 1995                        26
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

                     i.e., every 2 hours; For bowel-Incontinent 2-3 times a week.

                4-   Indicates total incontinence and no control (or an indwelling
                     catheter/ostomy that controls the client's bladder/bowel (without
                     leakage).

                Use of appliances and/or self-care should be indicated by an "N" or "Y" in
                the appropriate box(es) on the 1718.

             Note: If the client is incontinent, but self-care indicated, this does not
             constitute a deficit.
J.     Modes of Transfer - Select all that apply.

K.     Modes of Locomotion - Select all that apply.

L.     Appliance/Programs - Select all that apply.

M.     Communication

       Select the appropriate description and indicate by placing the corresponding
       number in the appropriate box by each of the four categories. Comment on any
       prosthesis and/or appliances the client uses.

       Modes of Expression: Indicate all that apply.

N.     Vision

       Select the appropriate description and indicate by placing the corresponding
       number in the column Comment on any prosthesis and/or appliances the client
       uses.


Section IV - Psychobehavioral Information

Note: For children under age twelve, completing of this section is not required but
comments should be made. Briefly describe the behavioral manifestations of daily
habits or psychological problems. The assessor is not diagnosing, but reporting
observable behavior.

O.     Cognitive Patterns

Revised November 1, 1995                        27
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services



       Comatose

       Indicates a state of unconsciousness from which a client cannot be aroused by
       verbal or light tactile stimuli; no communication skills.

       Record the appropriate number in the box. If a client is comatose, enter "1",
       then STOP Section IV here.




Revised November 1, 1995                        28
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

       Memory

       Coding for this section:

       0-      No problem to minimal problem
       1-      Moderate to severe problem
       2-      Unable to rate

       Short-term memory - Ask the client to describe a recent event. For example, ask
       the client to describe the breakfast meal, an activity just completed, or object
       recall, and rate accordingly using the appropriate number.

       Long-term memory - Engage in conversation that is meaningful to the client.
       Ask questions for which you already know the answers (from your review of
       record, general knowledge, family.) For example, "Are you married?", "What is
       your spouse's name?", "Do you have any children?", "How many?", "When is
       your birthday?". Rate accordingly.

       If the client has a moderate/severe problem, comment as to the degree of the
       problem and cite an example in the comments section.

       Cognitive Skills for Daily Decision Making (Judgment)

       Select appropriate description and code.

       0-      Independent - The client's decisions are consistent and reasonable,
               reflecting lifestyle, culture, values. The client organizes daily routine and
               makes decisions in a consistent, reasonable, and organized fashion.

       1-      Modified Independence - The client organizes daily routine and makes
               safe decisions in familiar situations, but experiences some difficulty in
               decision making when faced with new tasks or situations.

       2-      Moderately Impaired - The client's overall decisions are poor. The
               client requires reminders, cues, and supervision in planning, organizing,
               and correcting daily routines. Note: Cite an example in the Comments
               Section.

       3-      Severely Impaired - The client's overall decision making is severely
               impaired. The client never (or rarely) makes decisions. Note: Cite an

Revised November 1, 1995                        29
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

             example in the Comments Section.
P.     Mood and Behavior Patterns

       Select the code that most appropriately describes:

               Sad or Anxious Mood - This behavior pattern presents as distressed
               mood characterized by explicit verbal or gestural expressions of feeling
               depressed or anxious (or a synonym such as feeling sad, miserable, blue,
               hopeless, empty, or tearful.) Note: Specify behavior in the comments
               section.

               Problem Behavior - Four categories are listed. Code appropriate
               categories and specify behavior in the comments sections. Comment on
               past behavior if pertinent to current condition.

Q.     Mental Status Questionnaire

       Code as appropriate. The total MSQ score is the number of incorrect answers.
       Note: The MSQ is to be used only for a client 12 years or older.

R.     Comments

       Record pertinent additional information and date each entry.


Signature of Person Completing the Assessment Form

The individual who completes the initial assessment form must sign and date the form
and indicate his/her title in the space provided at the end of Section IV. Only nurses,
social workers, social service workers, or physicians may complete this form.

Grid

Place the date the corresponding column was completed and the initials of the person
completing the form. Gray Grid is for CLTC use only.


Section V - Environmental/Client Outcome Information - CLTC Use Only

This section is to be completed by the CLTC nurse consultant and case manager.

Revised November 1, 1995                        30
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

Instrumental Activities of Daily Living and Residence will be completed only on
community case management cases upon initial assessment and at re-evaluation.
S.    Client Outcomes

       Client outcome information will be annotated on all clients. Enter the date of
       action that the client entered the CLTC program or terminated. Use the code to
       indicate which CLTC program entered or the termination codes to show the
       reason for termination.

T.     Nursing Facility Certification

       Circle the appropriate level of care and annotate the effective date and expiration
       date of certification. Certifications are issued for 30 days unless a time-limited
       certification is given. If this is the case, the end date of the time-limited
       certification is the expiration date. Circle the appropriate response to indicate if
       the certification is time-limited and the name of the nursing facility, if known.

U.     Instrumental Activities of Daily Living

       Instrumental Activities of Daily Living will be completed only on community case
       management cases upon initial assessment and at re-evaluation.

       Using the codes 1 = Independent, 2 = Some Assistance, and 3 = Dependent,
       respond to the 7 items that relate to the client's ability to perform instrumental
       ADL's. Use the comments section if further explanation is needed for clarification
       of an entry. Example: Medication - If coded limited assistance, an example
       comment would be "medications require set up".

V.     Residence

       This Section will be completed only on community case management cases upon
       initial assessment and re-evaluation. Using the codes 1 = yes and 2 = no,
       respond to the nine items that relate to environmental factors which relate to the
       client's residence. Use the Comments Section if further explanation or
       clarification is needed.




Revised November 1, 1995                        31
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

                                   Guide to Developmental Stages of Children

1 Month
 Eyes follow bright moving object
 Responds to noises
 Makes throaty noise                                      10 Months
 Makes crawling movements when prone                       Sits without support
 When held in standing position, body limp at knees        Pulls self up
and hips
                                                            Can hold bottle and feed self crackers
 In sitting position back is uniformly rounded,
absence of                                                  Claps hands
   head control                                             Can drink from cup
                                                            4 upper incisors
2 Months                                                    Crawls by pulling self forward with hands
 Turns from side to back                                   Pulls self to sitting position
 Begins to lift head, smiles                               Stands while holding onto furniture, sits by
 Some eye coordination, follows sounds                    falling
 Anticipates being fed, put hands in mouth                   down
 When prone, can life head almost 45 degrees off
table                                                      12 Months
 When held in sitting position, holds head up but          Shows anger, fear, affection
head bobs                                                   Triple birth weight
   forward                                                  Begins to stand alone and toddle
                                                            Has 2 lower incisors
3 Months                                                    Uses spoon
 Holds head high, makes crawling movements when            Builds blocks (2)
prone
                                                            Tries to toss objects
 Has fairly good head control, turns head to follow
people                                                      Has regular B.Ms.
 Holds objects in hands                                    Attention span increases
 Smiles, coos                                              Cruises or walks holding onto furniture or with
                                                           both
 Focuses and follows objects                                 hands held
 Able to hold head more erect when sitting, but            Walks with one hand held
still bobs
   forward                                                  May attempt to stand alone momentarily
 When held in standing position, able to bear slight       Can sit down from standing position without help
fraction
   of weight on legs                                       15 Months
                                                            Walks without help (usually since age 13 months)
4 Months                                                    Creeps up stair
 Laughs, cries for attention                               Assumes standing position without support
 Rolls from back to side                                   Uses cup well but rotates spoon
 Listens, turns head to sound                              Feeds self using regular cup with little spilling
 Holds objects, takes to mouth
 Sleeps through the night, has naptime                    18 Months
 Recognizes mother, responds to "no"                       Runs clumsily, falls often
 Able to sit erect if propped up                           Walks upstairs with one hand held
                                                            Seats self on chair
6 Months                                                    Manages spoon without rotation, but some spilling
 Sits in high chair with back straight                     Takes off gloves, socks, and shoes and unzips
 When held in standing position, bears almost all of
weight                                                     24 Months
                                                            Uses short sentences
7 Months                                                    Obeys simple commands
 2 central lower incisors                                  Walks up and down stairs, has steady gait
 Double birth weight                                       Holds cup for drinking
 Bears full weight on feet                                 Feeds self with spoon
 Rolls over easily                                         Kicks ball, builds 4 to 6 block tower
 Starts to talk "Ma" "Da"                                  Rides tricycle
 Laughs                                                    Uses "mine - no" words
 Frets when mother leaves                                  Resists bedtime
 When held in standing position, bounces actively          Cooperates with toilet training
                                                            Clings to parents
8 Months
                                                            Routine is important
 Sits steadily un supported
                                                            Has 4 cuspids
 Readily bears weight on legs when supported, may
stand                                                       Runs fairly well, with wide stance
   holding on                                               Dresses self in simple clothing

9 Months
 Crawls, may progress backward at first
 Sits steadily on floor for prolonged time (10
minutes)
 Pulls self to standing position and stands holding
onto
   furniture                                               3 Years


Revised November 1, 1995                        32
South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care Manual
    for Medicaid-Sponsored Long Term Care Services

 Plays with others - takes turns                        4 second molars
 Has full set of teeth (20)
 Colors
 Begins 5 lb. weight gain per year
 Rides tricycle, dances, jumps, swings and climbs
 Knows and gives full name
 Talks in short sentences
 Undresses self, washes and dries hands
 Feeds self with spoon
 Begins to handle short separation from parents
 Begins to identify genders
 Jumps with both feet
 May attend to toilet needs without help except for
wiping
 Goes up stairs using alternate feet, may still come
down
   using both feet on the step
 Buttons and unbuttons accessible buttons
 Pulls on shoes
4 Years
 Buttons front and side of clothes
 Adds 9-10 inches to height
 Laces shoes
 Baths self with directions
 Brushes teeth
 Climbs and jumps well
 Tries to print letters
 Learns some numbers, colors
 Asks many questions and uses language
 Performs simple tasks
 Keen observer
 Skips andhops on one foot
 Walks down stairs using alternate footing

5 Years
 Gains 7 lbs.per year (varies)
 Has good motor control
 Washes self
 Height increases 2½ inches per year (varies)
 Prints first name and other words
 Talks constantly
 Participates in conversations, asks for definitions
 Begins to lose baby teeth; permanent teeth appear
   about 4 per year from 7-14 years
 Knows age and residence
 Knows weeks, days of week, colors
 Counts to 10, can copy a triangle
 Is obedient, reliable and sympathetic
 Eyes become fully developed
 Protective toward younger children
 Accepts responsibility for actions, is less
rebellious
 Shares toys
 Skips and hops on alternate feet
 Balances on alternate feet with eyes closed
 Ties shoelaces
 Cares for self totally, occasionally needing
supervision
   in dress or hygiene




Revised November 1, 1995                        33
