  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                                                                     November 1, 2022



                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS ...................................................................................................................... 1

02.10      Introduction .............................................................................................................................. 2

02.20      Assessment Policy and Procedure ........................................................................................... 3

          02.21           Consent Form ........................................................................................................... 3

          02.22            Participant Service Choice ...................................................................................... 3

          02.23            Individuals Who May Complete Pre-Admission Screening Assessment ............... 8

02.30        Timeliness Standards for Completion of an Assessment .................................................... 10

02.40          Application Withdrawal .................................................................................................... 11

02.50 Accurate Assessment Completion .......................................................................................... 12

02.60      Medical Information Completion .......................................................................................... 14

          02.61       Obtaining Medical Information for Medically Ineligible Applicants ........................ 14

02.70 Pre-Admission Review for Waiver Enrollment ...................................................................... 16

02.80      Transfer of Pending Waiver Applicant to another CLTC Region ......................................... 18




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                                                                     Page 1
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                           November 1, 2022

  02.10     Introduction


            Assessment is a method of determining an applicant's current long-term care needs by
            using a comprehensive standard instrument. Information obtained during the assessment
            process should be adequate for the SCDHHS worker to make a level of care decision
            and to initiate service planning for discussion with the applicant and/or Authorized
            Representative.

            An assessment form must be completed for any person referred to CLTC who meets the
            intake criteria unless the applicant is terminated prior to assessment completion.




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                   Page 2
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                               November 1, 2022

02.20        Assessment Policy and Procedure


     02.21     Consent Form

                South Carolina Long Term Care Assessments submitted to the local CLTC Area
                Office from outside entities must include a signed Consent Form, DHHS Form 121,
                signed by the applicant or Authorized Representative. The purpose of this form is to
                ensure that the applicant, whenever possible, is involved in planning long term care
                needs and to obtain consent from the applicant for CLTC to share information with
                involved service providers.

                Note: For nursing facility cases, continue to accept the previous hard copy Consent
                Form until the presently used Phoenix form may be printed.

                If a case is closed for any reason and later reopened, a new Consent Form must be
                obtained. An exception to this policy is made for re- certifications. (See Chapter 8
                Nursing Home.)

                The Consent Form may be signed by the Authorized Representative only when the
                applicant is not mentally or physically able to sign the form, or at the applicant’s
                request. It must be signed before the SCDHHS worker can take any action on the
                case.

                If an applicant signs by making a mark, the form must be witnessed by the person
                receiving the consent and one other person.

                It is appropriate to accept verbal consent when all other options are exhausted or when
                the assessment is being completed by phone. The verbal consent must be signed by
                the person receiving the consent and one other witness.

                The SCDHHS worker updates the Consent obtained date field of Participant
                Information in Phoenix each time a new Consent is obtained.

     02.22      Participant Service Choice
                A written Participant Service Choice Form must be secured from the applicant to
                ensure that the applicant is involved in long term care planning. This location choice
                will remain in effect until such time as the applicant changes the location choice or
                until the case is terminated. If the applicant lacks the physical or mental ability
                required to make a written choice regarding care or at the request of the applicant, the
                Authorized Representative may sign the Participant Service Choice, DHHS Form 164.
                In these cases, if the Authorized Representative is not available, efforts should be
                made to make a phone contact with the Authorized Representative to discuss location
                choice and document the discussion in the Comment Section of the form.


Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                        Page 3
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                                November 1, 2022


                   The absence of a signature from the applicant or Authorized Representative must be
                   documented in the Comment Section of the Participant Service Choice, DHHS
                   Form 164. For waiver application, the SCDHHS worker or Contract Case Manager
                   must obtain the signature of the participant and/or Authorized Representative on the
                   Participant Service Choice Form in Phoenix during the Initial Visit.

                   The Participant Service Choice SCDHHS Form 164 is required for all CLTC
                   waivers. The Participant Service Choice SCDHHS Form 164 is not required for
                   participants entering a Nursing Home from the community or from a hospital or in
                   instances of a Nursing Home conversion.

                   An individual has the right to assume risk, commensurate with that person’s ability
                   and willingness to assume responsibility for the consequences of that risk. This, of
                   course, does not abrogate a State’s statutory duty to ensure the health and welfare
                   of individuals served under the Home and Community-Based Services waivers.
                   Staff should exercise good professional judgment in dealing with cases where the
                   applicant’s health, safety, and welfare are questionable. Cases should be discussed
                   with designated Lead Team and Area Administrator. The CLTC Upstate
                   Director/Low Country Director and Central Office Quality Assurance should be
                   consulted. Legal counsel may also be needed. Documentation is crucial in these
                   cases. Referrals must be made to other agencies (DMH, DSS, etc.) as appropriate
                   and/or as required by State law.


         2.22.01      Appointing an Authorized Representative

                      An Authorized Representative is an individual or organization appointed by the
                      waiver participant to act on the participant’s behalf. An Authorized
                      Representative has authority to file and represent the beneficiary in appeals,
                      receive information regarding the participant’s medical condition, and provide
                      necessary information on how the participant performs activities of daily living.
                      The Authorized Representative can also communicate regarding the
                      participant’s service needs and choice of provider.

                              Appointing an Authorized Representative for Long-Term Care
                              Services – Form 1282 CLTC

                                  •      Name, Address and Phone number must be completed for each
                                         Authorized Representative.
                                  •      A separate Form 1282 CLTC must be completed in its entirety
                                         for each Authorized Representative to be appointed.
                                         (Maximum of 3)
                                  •      Signature: The form must be signed by the participant or their
                                         legal representative.
                                          o      Verbal Authorization will be accepted if the Verbal
                                                 Authorization section of the form is completed in its
Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                         Page 4
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                           November 1, 2022
                                          entirety. If verbal authorization is received, physical
                                          signature will not be required.
                                    o     If the participant is signing with an “x”, two (2)
                                          witnesses of the participant’s signature are required.
                                               Note: Case Manager can be one of the witnesses
                                                  as long as they witnessed the participant sign the
                                                  form and there is an additional witness present.
                                    o     Please note that the Authorized Representative cannot
                                          serve as a witness.
                            •      Mental Incompetence: If a participant is mentally incompetent
                                   (does not understand), only a legal representative can appoint
                                   another individual/entity to act as the participant’s Authorized
                                   Representative.

                                   Note: If the participant has an intellectual disability or
                                   diagnosis dementia but has not been legally declared
                                   incompetent, they can appoint their Authorized Representative
                                   and sign their own consents.

                            •      Physical Incapacity: If a participant is physically incapacitated
                                   (cannot communicate verbally, by gesture or other means),
                                   only a legal representative can appoint another
                                   individual/entity to act as the participant’s Authorized
                                   Representative.
                            •      Legal Representative: A legal representative is someone that is
                                   appointed by the participant through a Power of Attorney OR
                                   appointed by a Court to act on behalf of the participant. The
                                   legal representative must provide a copy of the document
                                   evidencing their authority to act on the participant’s behalf in
                                   order for their authority to appoint an Authorized
                                   Representative to be recognized.
                            •      A Form 1282 CLTC is binding until revoked or until the waiver
                                   case is closed.

                            Appointment of an Authorized Representative is not required, a
                            waiver participant has the right to represent themselves. Should the
                            waiver participant waive their right to appoint an Authorized
                            Representative, the appropriate box on the Form 1282 CLTC should
                            be selected.

                            •      If a Form 1282 CLTC was not obtained during the Intake
                                   referral process, the SCDHHS area office nurse or social
                                   worker will perform a phone assessment and complete the
                                   Form 1282 CLTC during the assessment indicating an
                                   Authorized Representative or that the participant has declined
                                   to appoint an Authorized Representative.
                            •      A Form 1282 CLTC can be mailed to the waiver participant if
Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                    Page 5
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                           November 1, 2022
                                   desired.

                            For existing participants:

                            •      The Case Manager will check the Authorized Representative
                                   Tab under forms for all participants on their caseloads to see if
                                   a Form 1282 CLTC has been completed. The Case Manager
                                   will obtain the completed Form 1282 CLTC from each
                                   participant who does not already have the form completed.
                            •      A completed Form 1282 CLTC is required to be in each file for
                                   existing participants by the beginning of the next quarter
                                   following implementation of this policy.


                            Quarterly Contact: These questions must be addressed by the
                            Case manager during the quarterly contact phone call:

                            •       Does the participant have a signed 1282 CLTC on file?
                            •       Does the participant need to make a change to Form 1282
                                    CLTC? If so, has the Revocation from been sent? Has the
                                    Revocation form been received by the participant?
                            •       If applicable, Does the participant have a signed Form 121 on
                                    file?

                            A waiver participant can appoint up to three (3) Authorized
                            Representatives at a time. Should the waiver participant choose to
                            appoint more than one Authorized Representative, they all share
                            equal power to act on the participant’s behalf. There is no ranking or
                            system of succession among the appointed Authorized
                            Representatives.

                            Information regarding a participant (including application status) can
                            only be released to an appointed Authorized Representative. While
                            SCDHHS cannot release information, we can accept information
                            from sources other than the Authorized Representative.

                            Documenting Authorized Representatives

                            The Authorized Representative’s name is entered in Phoenix in the
                            Caregiver Supports dashboard. The name of the Authorized
                            Representative should be saved when uploading the completed Form
                            1282 CLTC in Phoenix under the Authorized Representative Tab in
                            Scans.




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                    Page 6
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                            November 1, 2022
                             Confirming Authority of Authorized Representative

                             The SCDHHS worker or Case Manager must review the Caregiver
                             Supports Section to confirm an Authorized Representative Form is on
                             file before releasing any information on the participant.


         02.22.02      FORM 121– Consent Form

                             Form 121 gives SCDHHS area office staff/contract Case
                             Managers:

                             •       authorization to receive information from providers and
                             •       authorization to disclose information to providers and outside
                                     agencies regarding waiver participants.

                             By signing this form, the participant authorizes social service
                             professionals, doctors, nurses, and other providers to release
                             information to SCDHHS area staff/Case managers regarding the
                             participant’s diagnosis and recommended treatment.

                             This form also authorizes SCDHHS to release information to
                             providers when referring the participant for care or treatment.

                             This form also authorizes SCDHHS to inform Alzheimer’s
                             disease and Related Disorders Registry of certain related
                             diagnoses.

                            This form also authorizes SCDHHS to release information to
                            certain law enforcement agencies when there is a reasonable belief
                            that the participant is a victim of abuse, neglect or exploitation.

                             However, the participant may also indicate organizations,
                             agencies or persons to whom their information should NOT be
                             shared.

                            For Adult Protective Services Cases (APS), if the SCDHHS area
                            staff/contract Case manager is making the APS report for suspected
                            abuse, SCDHHS can disclose information without a signed Form 121
                            LTL. If SCDHHS area office staff did NOT make the APS referral
                            and information is being requested, then Form 121 LTL is required.


                            SCDHHS area staff/contract Case Managers are responsible for
                            sending Form 121 LTL to outside agencies requesting information
                            about a waiver participant. Form 121 LTL is mailed to outside
                            agencies upon request.
Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                     Page 7
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                           November 1, 2022


                             A waiver participant may revoke or change this consent at any time
                             by completing the Revocation of Authorization to Disclose
                             Health Information.

                             The Revocation of Authorization MUST include:

                                 •   Name of the waiver participant
                                 •   Name of the person who signed the authorization
                                 •   date of signature
                                 •   Effective date of the withdrawal/revocation
                                 •   Signatures and date of the waiver participant or Legal
                                     Representative
                                         o If signed by a Legal Representative, documentation or
                                             their authority must be attached (i.e., POA)

                             Upon receipt of a Revocation of Authorization form, the SCDHHS
                             area staff/Case Manager must 1) submit the form for legal review
                             through Service Manager and 2) Scan the form to the Phoenix record.

                             If an appointed Authorized Representative chooses to no longer act in
                             that capacity, the Authorized Representative must contact the agency
                             to inform them of their decision to no longer act as the Authorized
                             Representative. The Case Manager should notify the participant that
                             the Authorized Representative no longer wishes to act as their
                             Authorized Representative.

                             The following forms can be found in Phoenix Help and must be
                             uploaded to the participant’s Phoenix record if applicable:

                             •   Appointing an Authorized Representative Form 1282 LTL
                             •   Authorization to Disclose Health Information Form 921
                             •   Revocation of Authorization to Disclose Health Information
                             •   Revocation of Appointing an Authorized Representative Form


                             Note:   If a SCDHHS Worker is contacted by a non-authorized
                                     representative, information can be obtained/received from
                                     this person, but no information can be disclosed/given.

     02.23      Individuals Who May Complete Pre-Admission Screening Assessment
                Individuals who may complete an assessment are as follows:


                1. SCDHHS worker.

Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                   Page 8
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                                 November 1, 2022
                2. Any person who is professionally involved in the applicant's case and is a
                   nurse, social worker, social services worker, and/or physician.

                No portion of the assessment can be completed by any person who is related to the
                applicant.

     02.24      How to Determine Who Will Complete the Assessment
                The location of the applicant at the time of assessment may determine who will
                complete the assessment.

                An applicant located in a Medicaid certified long-term care facility will be assessed
                by the staff of that facility. When an applicant is in a non-Medicaid certified facility,
                the assessor will be determined by a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) between
                the SCDHHS Area Office and the Nursing Home Administrator.

                If no agency is currently involved with the applicant or if that agency is unable to
                complete the assessment, a SCDHHS worker will complete the assessment.

                An initial waiver assessment may be completed on a hospitalized applicant by a
                SCDHHS worker or by hospital staff trained to complete the CLTC assessment
                tool.




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                          Page 9
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                           November 1, 2022


  02.30    Timeliness Standards for Completion of an Assessment
            When a referral is received for a Nursing Home applicant located in a hospital, the
            SCDHHS worker must complete the assessment within five (5) business days of the case
            assignment date.

            When a referral is received for a Nursing Home applicant located in a nursing home or
            community or a referral is received for a Community-Based applicant from any referral
            source, the SCDHHS worker must complete the assessment within ten (10) business
            days of the case assignment date.

            Any exceptions to these timeframes must be documented in the narrative.

            A level of care decision must be rendered within three (3) business days of the
            assessment being complete. Assessment completion may be delayed beyond the
            assessment date if additional information is needed from other knowledgeable sources.
            The SCDHHS worker will document any reason for delay in assessment completion in
            the narrative.

            Note: Three (3) attempts, within a ten (10) business day timeframe, should be made to
            complete the assessment. These attempts must be on different days at different times.
            Each attempt must be narrated in Phoenix. After the third attempt, send out a CLTC
            Notification Form 171 to the applicant/Authorized Representative including the appeals
            notice. A copy of the Form 171 should also be sent to Medicaid Eligibility. If no
            response is received within ten (10) business days, then terminate the application.




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                    Page 10
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                              November 1, 2022

  02.40     Application Withdrawal
            After intake, an applicant who does not appear to exhibit functional deficits can
            withdraw application prior to or during the assessment process. The SCDHHS worker
            will explain the level of care criteria and the reason why the applicant most likely does
            not meet the criteria. If the SCDHHS worker and the applicant determine that application
            withdrawal is appropriate, the CLTC Application Withdrawal Form, DHHS Form 150,
            must be reviewed with the applicant and/or Authorized Representative and the signature
            of the applicant and/or Authorized Representative can be requested. The SCDHHS
            worker should not utilize the Application Withdrawal Form if there are any questions
            about the applicant's ADL/Medical condition, or if the applicant/Authorized
            Representative does not agree with the withdrawal of the application. Once the applicant
            and/or Authorized Representative signs the form, the program application and case,
            where applicable, will be terminated in the Status Changes section of Phoenix as
            "Declined Participation." The SCDHHS worker will advise the applicant and/or
            Authorized Representative that a new application can be made at any time and will
            discuss possible community resources which may meet the applicant’s needs. In the
            event the applicant and/or Authorized Representative declines to sign the form after it
            has been explained or disagrees with the SCDHHS worker’s findings, the assessment
            process must continue using established policy and procedures.




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                     Page 11
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                                November 1, 2022
  02.50     Accurate Assessment Completion
            The SCDHHS worker will contact the applicant and/or family, hospital, or agency, as
            appropriate, to arrange for assessment completion on assigned cases. The SCDHHS
            worker must document all attempts to schedule the assessment in the narrative record.
            The SCDHHS worker may complete the assessment by conducting a face-to-face visit,
            record review, or by a telephone interview. Phone assessment is not appropriate if
            information received is not clear, the information received is questionable, or the Level
            of Care is not clearly Intermediate or Skilled. In these situations, a face-to-face visit is
            required. A face-to-face visit should be made if the applicant has impaired ability to
            communicate due to hearing or speech impairment, language barrier or upon the
            applicant’s request. The full Phoenix assessment will be completed when a face-to-face
            assessment visit is completed. Additional input from the physician or knowledgeable
            other(s) may be required.

            The SCDHHS worker will obtain a signed Consent Form, DHHS Form 121, in Phoenix
            when a face-to-face assessment visit is made. If a telephone interview is conducted, the
            SCDHHS worker will obtain verbal consent. The verbal consent will be indicated on
            the Consent Form, DHHS Form 121 and must be signed by the person receiving the
            consent and one other witness. (A signed Consent Form, DHHS Form 121, in Phoenix
            will be obtained at the Initial Visit by the on-going Case Manager.)

            The SCDHHS worker will obtain a signed Participant Service Choice Form, DHHS
            Form 164, in Phoenix when a face-to-face assessment visit is made. If a telephone
            interview is conducted, the SCDHHS worker will obtain a verbal choice. The verbal
            choice will be indicated on the Service Choice Form, DHHS Form 164, and must be
            signed by the person receiving the service choice. (A signed Service Choice Form,
            DHHS Form 164 in Phoenix will be obtained at the Initial Visit by the on-going Case
            Manager.) The Service Choice Form does not require a witness signature.

            The assessment form must be completed accurately, obtaining all available information.
            Each applicable Phoenix section must be completed for both face-to-face and phone
            assessments. The assessor should read the South Carolina Assessment & Level of Care
            Manual for Medicaid-Sponsored Long-Term Care Services before completing an
            assessment and reference help sections in Phoenix. Only assessment information
            obtained and verified by the SCDHHS worker should be entered into Phoenix. Required
            assessment sections are determined by the type of program application. Each program
            designated section must be completed. It is the SCDHHS worker’s responsibility to
            ensure that the assessment is properly completed before a level of care decision is
            determined.

            When the assessor has created a phone assessment in Phoenix, and then it is determined
            that a face-to-face assessment is required, the assessor should complete a new
            assessment in Phoenix.

            Accurate assessment completion requires the assessor to ask comprehensive and
            interview led questions. If accurate assessment information cannot be obtained during a
            phone assessment, a face-to-face assessment is required. The assessor must attempt to
Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                        Page 12
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                            November 1, 2022
            involve the applicant as much as possible in the assessment process.

            When an applicant is physically or mentally unable to participate in an interview, the
            guardian, or Authorized Representative can be interviewed for completion of the
            assessment. Assessors should complete the Mental Status Questionnaire (MSQ) to aid
            in the determination of the applicant's mental awareness.

            The assigned SCDHHS worker informs the applicant and/or Authorized Representative
            of options concerning nursing home care or CLTC waiver services; obtains a Participant
            Service Choice Form for CLTC waiver services, DHHS Form 164 and Consent Form,
            DHHS Form 121; completes all appropriate sections/tabs in Phoenix; annotates the
            Narrative and Narrative Checklist; completes correspondence as appropriate to referring
            agency, applicant, and other individuals involved with the applicant; scans any forms
            and documents to the appropriate scan tag and routes correspondence to the designated
            Support Staff for mailing and/or filing as appropriate.

            The designated Support Staff mails correspondence, and files as indicated.

            The Medicaid category should be confirmed in Phoenix or in MMIS prior to
            proceeding with the assessment. All information in the applicant’s information tab
            should be completed and confirmed (social security number, Medicaid ID, address,
            and phone number).

            Note: Non-waiver supports, such as Home Health, should be verified by contacting the
            providing agency and verifying services provided to avoid duplication of services. This
            should include the service type/discipline, start of care date, and the frequency of
            service.




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                     Page 13
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                                November 1, 2022
02.60    Medical Information Completion

        The Diagnoses/Conditions section of the Assessment is the medical summary. This section
        must be completed on all applicants reviewed by SCDHHS for a final level of care
        determination. The assigned SCDHHS worker completes all appropriate information in
        Phoenix.

        The SCDHHS worker should not delay the level of care decision in an effort to have
        diagnosis/conditions section verified by a medical source. However, if the SCDHHS worker
        is not able to identify reliable and accurate information, he/she should seek assistance from:
        physician, physician's staff, hospital staff, medical record, home health agency, Authorized
        Representative/applicant, and/or involved agencies. The SCDHHS worker is responsible for
        obtaining the most reliable and accurate information available.

        02.61   Obtaining Medical Information for Medically Ineligible Applicants
                The Physician Input Letter should be obtained for participants/applicants who have a
                skilled need or skilled service need without a complete functional deficit. The
                SCDHHS worker will seek medical information from the physician or primary care
                provider by mailing or faxing the Physician’s Input Letter and the CLTC Consent Form
                121. The Physician’s Input Letter is available in Forms. The SCDHHS worker will add
                the source of the medical information in the Phoenix Source of Information/Level of
                Care section. The SCDHHS worker should consult with Central Office on difficult
                cases that cannot be resolved in the local SCDHHS Area Office or on cases where
                efforts to verify medical information from the physician or physician's staff have been
                unsuccessful. The applicant cannot be closed as Medically Ineligible until receiving
                input from the physician.

                Three (3) attempts within ten (10) business days should be made with the physician’s
                office to coordinate completion of the physician information form. If the form remains
                incomplete after three (3) attempts within ten (10) business days, then additional
                information can be obtained by phone from the physician’s office and narrated in
                Phoenix. The assessment may be team discussed with the lead team nurse based on the
                information that was provided to the SCDHHS worker during the initial assessment.

                If a waiver applicant appears to be medically ineligible, the SCDHHS worker must
                complete the following tasks:

                •   Obtain medical information from the physician by mailing or faxing the
                    Physician’s Input Letter and the CLTC Consent Form 121.

                •   Contact the applicant/Authorized Representative for clarification as necessary
                    which may include a face- to-face visit by a Nurse Consultant.

                •   Conduct a team conference with another Nurse Consultant to reach a joint level of
                    care decision.


Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                       Page 14
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                               November 1, 2022
             •    If an applicant is Medically Ineligible after assessment and completion of the
                  Physician Information Form, the nurse should send the case to the Area
                  Administrator and/or the Lead Team Nurse for review prior to closing the case as
                  Medically Ineligible. If the Level of Care remains in question, it should be sent to
                  the Central Office Designee for further review.

              •   If a level of care decision cannot be reached, consult with the Area Administrator.
                  If efforts to verify medical information with the physician are unsuccessful, (i.e.:
                  unable to obtain a completed MD Input Form) the case may be staffed with the
                  Area Administrator based current information available. If the SCDHHS worker
                  and the Area Office Administrator are unable to make a level of care
                  determination, forward case to the Waiver Service Exception group for final level
                  of care determination.

              •   Complete the Level of Care section in Phoenix.

             Note: The assessor should not sign the Source of Information/ Level of Care tab until
             all assessment information has been obtained. This marks assessment completion. The
             reviewer will sign and date following the level of care team conference unless the case
             will be sent for Central Office review. In these cases, the reviewer will not sign until a
             final level of care determination is made. Level of Care Exceptions made by Central
             Office require a third signature.

              •   Discuss Level of Care decision and possible alternatives with applicant and/or
                  Authorized Representative.

              •   Create and send a CLTC Notification Form 171 to Central Medicaid Eligibility
                  to notify them of the case closure.

              •   Send a Client Notification Form, including the appeals notice, to the
                  applicant/Authorized Representative informing them of case closure.
                  Applicant/Authorized Representative has ten (10) business days to respond
                  from the date of the notification.

              •   Document all activities in the Narrative.

              •   Terminate the application effective date of case closure.




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                      Page 15
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                                  November 1, 2022



02.70   Pre-Admission Review for Waiver Enrollment
        Pre-admission review is completed by a SCDHHS worker for an applicant who applies for
        waiver enrollment. Policy and procedure must be followed for intake, assessment, level of
        care, and Medicaid financial eligibility.

        The pre-admission review information must provide accurate and comprehensive information.
        The Assessment must present a clear picture of the applicant's medical, skin/nutrition,
        functional abilities, and communication/psycho-behavioral status. In addition, the following
        information must be addressed and documented in the applicant’s record by the SCDHHS
        worker:

        •        Setting during interview process, including persons present, applicant involvement in
                 assessment process and explanation of CLTC program. If the assessment is completed
                 by phone, indicate the individuals participating in the phone interview.

        •        Special alerts, including pets in the home, type of pets and if the pets are dangerous or
                 bite, smoking in the home and oxygen in use, and reports of bedbugs in the home.


        During face-to-face or phone assessments, the SCDHHS worker will verify the accuracy of all
        information in the Participant Information section.

                •     If the assessment is completed by home visit, a CLTC brochure will be provided
                informing the applicant/Authorized Representative of available waiver services. If the
                assessment is completed by phone, the SCDHHS worker will explain the available
                waiver services verbally.
                •
                If the assessment occurs in the home, the SCDHHS worker completes the Home
                Assessment, Caregiver Supports and the Medication tab.
                The SCDHHS Area Office and SCDHHS worker’s contact information will be provided.
                Referrals should be made to other agencies for the immediate needs of the applicant as
                appropriate, i.e., Adult Protective Services. Any referrals made on the applicant’s behalf
                will be documented in the narrative.

            If the applicant does not enroll in the waiver within thirty (30) calendar days of the initial
            assessment, a new assessment must be completed. The SCDHHS worker must contact the
            applicant and/or Authorized Representative to confirm the information obtained in the
            assessment and document this contact in the narrative. (It may be necessary to re-verify
            Medicaid financial eligibility depending on the amount of time the case has been pending.)
            This contact must be made before the case is transferred to the Case Manager II for waiver
            entry and service plan development.
            If the applicant appears to be medically ineligible at any time while the case is pending, a
Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                          Page 16
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                                  November 1, 2022
         face-to-face visit must be made to complete a new assessment and re-determine the level of
         care.

         The date the applicant is determined to be eligible (level of care, location of care, Medicaid
         financially eligible, wants to participate in the waiver, and slot available) to enter the waiver
         must be documented in the narrative by the SCDHHS worker.

         The SCDHHS worker must call to confirm the participant’s location prior to the transfer
         conference and enrollment.

         The SCDHHS worker and the Case Manager II must team staff the assessment information
         for service plan development and to enter the case into the waiver within five (5) business
         days of the applicant becoming eligible. Any delays in case transfer must be documented
         in the narrative.

         The SCDHHS worker completes a narrative entry documenting the team conference with
         the Case Manager II was held.

         Note: The applicant must be enrolled in the waiver by the Case Manager II on the same day
         of the SCDHHS worker/Case Manager conference.

         The enrolling Case Manager II must complete the following tasks on the date of enrollment
         which is the same date of the transfer conference:

         •    Narrate the transfer conference with the SCDHHS worker

         •   Change the Participant Status to “participating” in Phoenix,


         •    Notifies the designated CLTC Support Staff for RSP indicator entry. The RSP entry
              must be completed within four (4) business days of the waiver enrollment date.

         NOTE: Send a CLTC Notification Form to the participant, and/or Authorized
            Representative after contact with them to notify of the waiver enrollment.




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                          Page 17
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 2 – Assessment Procedures                                               November 1, 2022

02.80   Transfer of Pending Waiver Applicant to another CLTC Region

         When a pending waiver applicant, who has been assessed by a SCDHHS worker, moves to
         another CLTC region, the transfer conference may be accomplished by telephone between
         the transferring region SCDHHS worker and the receiving region Case Manager II. This
         policy applies to an eligible applicant (level of care, location of care, Medicaid financially
         eligible, wants to participate and waiver slot available.)

         Note: If dis-enrollment from a non-compatible waiver or managed care plan is necessary,
            this must be completed online, and the change reflected in Phoenix by the transferring
            SCDHHS worker prior to the transfer.

         The SCDHHS worker will initiate the Phoenix transfer process and will remain assigned to
         the applicant in pending waiver status until the transfer telephone conference is completed
         with the receiving SCDHHS Area Office. The transferring SCDHHS worker will ensure all
         forms or documents not completed in Phoenix are scanned to the participant’s Phoenix
         record. Once the transferring office cues Phoenix to transfer the case, the transferring CLTC
         Regional Office Case Management Team and Support Staff will no longer have access to
         the record. Note: Nurse Consultants have statewide Phoenix access. The transferring
         SCDHHS worker should complete all actions before cueing the Phoenix transfer. The
         receiving Case Manager II routes the information to the Support Staff who will mail any
         items to be sent to the participant and/or Authorized Representative.

         The Designated Support Staff makes the appropriate copies as directed and routes to the
         designated persons/agencies.




Chapter 2-Assessment                                                                       Page 18
