  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                                                                  November 1, 2022

                                               TABLE OF CONTENTS

_Toc8068735805.10             Introduction...................................................................................................... 2

05.20    Waiver Enrollment .................................................................................................................. 4

05.30    Case Management Policy and Procedure ................................................................................ 7

        05.31      On-going Case Management ....................................................................................... 7

        05.32      Service Counseling ................................................................................................... 10

        05.33      Service Planning ....................................................................................................... 11

        05.34      Service Coordination ................................................................................................ 11

        05.35      Monitoring ................................................................................................................ 12

                  05.35.10         Monitoring for Missed PCII Visit, Emergency/Disaster Priority and
                                     Emergency/Disaster Preparedness ...................................................... 17

        05.36      Assessment Completion at Re-Evaluation ................................................................ 19

        05.37      Re-Evaluation at 365-Day Intervals.......................................................................... 20

                  05.37.10         Hospitalized Waiver Participant Who is Due an Initial Visit or .............. 23

                  05.37.20         Re-Evaluation with Interruption of 365-Day Cycle Due to ADL/Medical
                                     ............................................................................................................. 23

        05.38      Waiver Participant Determined as Medically Ineligible........................................... 24

                  05.38.10         Financial Ineligibility ............................................................................... 25

        05.40      Institutionalization of a Waiver Participant .............................................................. 27

                  05.40.10         Incarceration of a Waiver Participant ...................................................... 28

05.50   Non-Compliant Participant .................................................................................................... 29

05.60    Leave of Absence from the State/CLTC Region of a Waiver Participant ............................ 31

05.70    Interactions with Hospice ..................................................................................................... 33

05.80    Process for Critical Incidents ................................................................................................ 34

05.90    Process for Visits to Participants with Active Bedbug Infestation ....................................... 38


Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                                                               Page 1
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                              November 1, 2022



  05.10    Introduction

             The philosophy of Community Long Term Care Case Management in South
             Carolina is to optimize the participant’s life choices and rights, to minimize threats
             to the participant’s safety and health, and to provide a mechanism for managing
             home and community based alternatives to institutional care. The program allows
             for a range of options based on choice, role, and responsibility in the decision-
             making process for persons to direct their own home and community based long term
             care services through the assistance of a Case Manager for the services identified as
             needed in their Service Plan.

             Community Long Term Care operates on the following program principles which
             support this case management philosophy:

             1.     To provide a mechanism for utilizing cost effective alternatives to
                    institutional care and to provide services for those participants eligible within
                    the constraints of affordability by maximizing the utilization of available
                    resources.

             2.     To ensure services are appropriate to the needs of individual participants, are
                    of acceptable quality, and do not duplicate other formal services.

             3.     To recognize and strive to honor the participant's decisions regarding the
                    Participant Service Choice Form and services received. However, a decision
                    to receive services, including case management cannot be based on gender,
                    gender identity, race, age, color, religion, or national origin.

             4.     To ensure the participant’s right to assume risk, commensurate with that
                    person’s ability and willingness to assume responsibility for the
                    consequences of that risk.

             5.     To acknowledge and respect the participant's right to be treated with
                    consideration and dignity.

             6.     To assist and not replace family members and other informal support systems
                    currently involved with the participant's care.

             7.     To make service decisions utilizing a multi-disciplinary team approach based
                    on comprehensive, on-going assessments which include input from the
                    participant and/or Authorized Representatives.

             8.     To provide a well-defined, visible, and accessible point of entry for long-
                    term care services.

             Case management is a waiver service that is provided to all participants who
             participate in the CLTC program. Case management is a vital part of the long-term
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                       Page 2
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                           November 1, 2022



             care service system available to Medicaid eligible participants and ensures
             continued access to this system.

             Participants can choose to have only case management services. In such situations,
             the value of case management is in the continued follow-up, coordination and
             monitoring of services other than CLTC waivered services. The Case Manager will
             also be able to periodically evaluate any changes in the participant's service needs.

             Case management includes the following five activities which are discussed in this
             chapter:

             •      Service Counseling.

             •      Service Planning.

             •      Service Coordination.

             •      Monitoring; and,

             •      Re-evaluation.


             Conflict Free Case Management

             The Case Management provider and its staff must be independent of the service
             delivery system and not a provider of services that could be incorporated into a
             CLTC participant’s plan of care (“conflict free case management”). These services
             include, but are not limited to, CLTC waiver services, home health services, and
             hospice services. CLTC is the final decision authority regarding questions
             concerning conflict free case management.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                    Page 3
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                              November 1, 2022


  05.20      Waiver Enrollment

             Pre-admission review is completed by a SCDHHS Worker for a participant who
             applies for the waiver. Policy and Procedure must be followed for intake,
             assessment, level of care, and Medicaid eligibility.

             A participant must be eligible is Medicaid financially eligible, meets level of care,
             completed the Participant Service Choice Form, and has an available waiver slot) to
             enter the waiver.

             If the participant does not enroll in the waiver within thirty (30) calendar days of
             the initial assessment, a new assessment must be completed by the SCDHHS
             Worker. A new assessment must be completed in Phoenix and a new level of care
             determined and recorded in Phoenix. This re-assessment may be completed by phone
             or visit. If the applicant appears to be medically ineligible at any time while the case
             is pending, a visit must be made to the applicant to re-determine the level of care. It
             may be necessary to re-verify Medicaid eligibility, depending on the amount of time
             the case has been pending.

             The SCDHHS Worker must call to confirm the participant’s present location and
             ensure there have been no significant changes in the applicant’s condition prior to
             the transfer conference and enrollment. The SCDHHS Worker should inform the
             applicant that the case is being transferred to the Case Manager II, Lead Team
             Case Manager, Lead Team Nurse Consultant or Area Administrator for
             enrollment. The SCDHHS Worker should notify the applicant that the Case
             Manager II, Lead Team Case Manager, Lead Team Nurse Consultant or Area
             Administrator will call to discuss service planning and service authorization.

             The SCDHHS Worker and the Case Manager II, Lead Team Case Manager, Lead
             Team Nurse Consultant or Area Administrator must team staff the assessment
             information for service plan development and waiver enrollment. Waiver enrollment
             date is the date case is team staffed. The participant’s current Medicaid financial
             category is reviewed by the Case Manager II, Lead Team Case Manager, Lead
             Team Nurse Consultant or Area Administrator at the time of the case transfer.

             The enrolling Case Manager II, Lead Team Case Manager, Lead Team Nurse
             Consultant or Area Administrator must complete the following tasks on the date
             of enrollment which is the same date of the transfer conference:

             •     Narrate the transfer conference with the SCDHHS Worker.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                      Page 4
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                           November 1, 2022



             •     Change the participant status to “participating” in Phoenix.

             •      Send a CLTC Notification Form to the participant, and/or Authorized
                    Representative notifying of the waiver enrollment. A CLTC Notification
                    Form is also required to be sent to Medicaid eligibility to notify them of
                    the enrollment.

             •      Notify the designated CLTC Support Staff for RSP indicator entry. The RSP
                    entry must be completed within four (4) business days of the waiver
                    enrollment date.

             The enrolling Case Manager II, Lead Team Case Manager, Lead Team Nurse
             Consultant or Area Administrator must complete the following tasks within seven
             (7) business days of the enrollment date:

             •      Prior to enrollment: call participant, and/or Authorized Representative to
                    involve in Service Plan development and review the services based on need.

             •      Contact the participant to confirm or obtain Case Management Provider
                    Choice if the provider choice form has not been received. These choices must
                    be documented on the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) and
                    in the narrative record in order of preference. The provider choice form must
                    be scanned into Phoenix. This choice must be confirmed at the Initial Visit
                    and the Provider Choice Form signed.

             Note: If the participant and/or Authorized Representative does not respond with a
                   Case Management Provider Choice within ten (10) business days from date it
                   was mailed, a Notification Form must be mailed to the participant and/or
                   Authorized Representative informing of the need to make a Case Management
                   Provider Choice within the next ten (10) business days. If the choice is not
                   received within the next ten (10) business days, the Area Administrator must be
                   consulted. Prior to case closure for this reason, the Area Administrator will
                   discuss with Regional CLTC Director.

             •      Explore community services and formal/informal supports.

             •      Review waiver services and offer option to make verbal choice of waiver
                    service providers.

             •      Record choices(s) on the Service Provider Report generated from Phoenix,
                    then initial and date form. Scan Service Provider Report into Phoenix
                    Scans.

Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                   Page 5
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                           November 1, 2022

             •      If verbal choice cannot be made, mail the appropriate Service Provider
                    Reports to the participant and/or Authorized Representative.

             •      Call participant and/or Authorized Representative within ten (10) business
                    days from the date the provider list was mailed to secure choice(s) for each
                    planned service.

             •      Key information in Phoenix identifying service plan interventions and
                    updating other sections of Phoenix as needed.

             •      Team discuss and sign the Service Plan with Case Manager II, Lead
                    Team Case Manager, Lead Team Nurse Consultant or Area
                    Administrator.

             •      Authorize one (1) unit of service for Case Management for SCDHHS.

             •      Refer chosen services including on-going waiver Case Management.

             •      Send Physician’s Order if needed for Nutritional Supplements or Private
                    Duty Nursing.

             Once a case is accepted by the Case Management Provider, team staffing must occur
             with the Case Manager II, Lead Team Case Manager, Lead Team Nurse
             Consultant or Area Administrator and on-going Case Manager within two (2)
             business days. If the on-going Case Manager does not contact the Case Manager
             II, Lead Team Case Manager, Lead Team Nurse Consultant or Area
             Administrator within two (2) business days for the team staffing to occur, the Case
             Manager II, Lead Team Case Manager, Lead Team Nurse Consultant or Area
             Administrator should proceed to the next Case Management Provider Choice by
             declining the referral and moving to the next referral. Documentation of this must be
             made in the Phoenix narrative. If a Case Management Provider choice is not made,
             SCDHHS will be the Case Manager until a choice is made.

             The SCDHHS Worker must narrate all team staffing activities or attempts for team
             staffing.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                    Page 6
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                                  November 1, 2022



  05.30   Case Management Policy and Procedure

      05.31       On-going Case Management

              The Case Manager must make the Initial Visit to the participant within thirty
              (30) calendar days of the waiver enrollment date.

              Exception: If the Initial Visit is due within five (5) business days of the on-going
                         Case Management referral, the on-going Case Manager must complete
                         the Initial Visit within ten (10) business days of accepting the referral.
                         The late activity will not be subject to strikes or recoupment for
                         timeliness if the visit is made within the ten (10) business days of referral
                         acceptance.

                            If the participant is hospitalized at the time of the scheduled Initial Visit,
                            the visit should be delayed until the participant is discharged. A visit is
                            due within seven (7) business days of notification of discharge.

              The Case Manager must complete the following during the Initial Visit.

              Initial Visit:

              •       Visit participant at the place of residence.

              •       Complete documentation in the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) by using the
                      participant’s landline phone for check-in and check-out or by using the EVV
                      Mobile Phone Application. The participant’s mobile phone must not be used
                      for check-in and check-out.

              •       The EVV check-in call must be made at the beginning of the visit AND a
                      check-out call must be made at the end of the visit.

              •       In cases where visits are made for more than one person in the same home,
                      the Case Manager should check-in and check-out for one person at a time, not
                      over lapping calls to EVV.

              •       Review assessment and add any updates or additional information needed in
                      the assessment comment field.

              •       Review Service Plan with the participant and revise as needed.

              •       Obtain signature of the participant and/or Authorized Representative on the
                      Service Plan Agreement. If no revisions are made, leave copy of Service Plan
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                           Page 7
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                            November 1, 2022

                    with the participant and/or Authorized Representative. If revisions are
                    necessary, mail a copy of the revised Service Plan to the participant and/or
                    Authorized Representative following the visit.

             •      Notify the providers of any Service Plan changes via phone call or
                    Conversation feature in Phoenix. The provider can access the updated
                    Service Plan in Phoenix.

             •      If the initial assessment was completed by phone, obtain signed CLTC
                    Consent Form in Phoenix.

             •      If the initial assessment was completed by phone, obtain signed Participant
                    Service Choice in Phoenix.
             •      Review, update and complete Waiver Service and Non-Waiver Service
                    (Referrals/Authorizations) tabs in Phoenix.


             •      Discuss the participant’s Personal Goals. Document any newly stated
                    Personal Goals in the Personal Goals Section in the Service Plan including
                    the steps to achieve the Personal Goal. Personal Goals must be time specific,
                    measurable and realistic. Review and document participant’s progress
                    toward previously stated Personal Goals. If the participant does not indicate
                    a Personal Goal, document in the narrative checklist.

             •      If services are provided prior to the initial visit being completed: review
                    Phoenix claims and Report for missed visits, exception codes, service
                    delivery, service provided as authorized during correct dates and times,
                    check- in and check-out from authorized phone, visits that are longer or
                    shorter than authorized. This may be completed by viewing the Claims
                    Section in Phoenix or by obtaining an activity report in Phoenix. Also, review
                    Phoenix claims and Reports to monitor activities task sheets and activities
                    observations. This may be completed by viewing Phoenix Reports then
                    Claims. This review may not be completed more than seven (7) business
                    days prior to the contact. Trends and patterns of problems rather than
                    isolated cases should be noted.

             •      Verify Medicaid financial eligibility for waiver services. It is important for the
                    Case Manager to check their dashboard often to monitor participants’
                    Medicaid eligibility.

             •      Verify choice of location of services. Must obtain participant signature on
                    CLTC Participant Service Choice form if previous choices were obtained by
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                     Page 8
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                            November 1, 2022

                    verbal consent.

             •      Review, complete and update Participant Information section in Phoenix.

             •      Review, complete and update Medication Section in Phoenix.

             •      Review, complete and update Home Assessment Section in Phoenix.

             •      Review, complete and update as needed Emergency Disaster Priority Section
                    in Home Assessment – Home Condition tab.

             •      In the Disaster Plan Box, record the full name, address and phone number of
                    the individual responsible for assisting the participant in the event of an
                    emergency/disaster.

             •      Review and obtain signatures on the Participant’s Rights and
                    Responsibilities Statement in Phoenix. Make every attempt to have the
                    participant and/or Authorized Representative sign. If the Authorized
                    Representative is unavailable, mail a copy to the Authorized Representative for
                    signature. A copy of the Participant’s Right and Responsibilities must be
                    given to the participant and/or Authorized Representative.

             •      Discuss Service Provider Report and obtain provider choice(s) in order of
                    preference for each planned service. Confirm any provider choice(s)
                    previously obtained. Obtain participant and/or Authorized Representative’s
                    signature and date. Signed Service Provider Reports must be scanned into
                    Phoenix Scans.

             Note: If the participant is not physically or mentally able to complete and/or sign
                   the Service Provider Report Form, the Authorized Representative may do so.
                   The lack of a signature on the form should not delay the participant from
                   receiving waiver services. The participant may receive waiver services as
                   long as a written choice is indicated on the form. However, every effort must
                   be made to secure a signature.

             •   Review, complete and update as needed the Caregiver Support Section in
                 Phoenix. If no Authorized Representatives are listed, the participant should
                 check the appropriate box on the Appointing an Authorized Representative
                 Form 1282 LTL to verify the section was reviewed.

             •   Provide the CLTC Information Folder. The CLTC Information Folder must
                 include:
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                     Page 9
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                                November 1, 2022


                       o      CLTC Brochure
                       o      Copy of Participant’s Rights and Responsibilities Form
                       o      Case Manager Business Card and Contact Information
                       o      Estate Recovery Brochure
                       o      Choosing a Case Manager Brochure
                       o      Choosing an Adult Day Health Care Brochure
                       o      Choosing a Personal Care 1 / Personal Care II Brochure
                       o      APS Brochure
                       o      Emergency Preparedness Information
                       o      Emergency Telephone Numbers Form
                       o      Evacuation Information
                       o      Emergency Checklist
                       o      Helpful Reminders in an Emergency Brochure


              •        During the check-out call through the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV), enter
                       the activity completed and any new observation. Observations that represent
                       a significant change should be entered.

              •        Any follow up activities and subsequent actions required as a result of
                       participant needs or provider compliance problem identified must be
                       documented in the narrative record.

              •        Complete the Initial Visit narrative and Narrative Checklist in Phoenix.

      05.32       Service Counseling
              Service counseling involves objectively consulting, discussing, advising, and
              listening. The CLTC Case Manager is in a position to confer with the participant
              and/or Authorized Representative concerning needs and to provide information that
              will assist them in making sound long term care decisions. The service counseling
              process includes educating the participant and/or Authorized Representative with the
              long term care options available to them and ensuring the participant's right to be
              involved in planning the care. The various service options and their expected
              outcomes should be clearly explored with the participant and/or Authorized
              Representative.

              Since service counseling is not clinical in nature, it is imperative that the Case
              Manager recognize when a referral for this type of professional intervention is
              needed. It is essential to assure effective case management so that the Case Manager
              does not become overly involved in complex or emotional situations. The Case
              Manager must be able to distinguish his/her role in service counseling and the need
              for clinical intervention for the participant and/or Authorized Representative. A
              referral for counseling should be incorporated into the Service Plan when clinical
              needs are identified.
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                         Page 10
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                              November 1, 2022


      05.33       Service Planning

              Person-Centered Service Planning is the active, on-going process of working
              together with the participant and/or Authorized Representative to assure the efficient
              provision of services. The Case Manager should constantly strive to empower the
              participant to become as independent as possible in advocating for his/her self and
              coordinating his/her own care.

              Partnership with the team member and other multi-disciplinary team members, the
              Case Manager should work toward developing an agreement with the participant
              and/or Authorized Representative regarding the participant’s needs that exist, the
              goals or outcomes to be reached, and the services and interventions to be explored
              to reach the goals.

              Through person-centered service planning, the Case Manager consistently strives to
              meet the needs of the participant through the exploration of all informal and formal
              services.

              Coordination with formal and informal services is required for the participant whose
              needs and/or informal supports are such that an emergency/disaster or the absence
              of an authorized PCII would have a substantial impact on the participant’s health and
              safety.

              Person-Centered Service Planning includes the development of a written Service
              Plan in partnership with the participant and parties involved in the Plan. By signing
              the Service Plan Agreement at the Case Manager's initial visit (and thereafter at the
              first quarterly visit following each re-evaluation), the participant, and/or Authorized
              Representative, confirms the Service Plan was developed with his/her input and
              evaluated with him/her at each re-evaluation visit.


              The overall goal of person-centered service planning is to promote the health and
              independence of the participant while involving the participant in all phases of
              planning, coordination, and evaluation.

      05.34       Service Coordination

              Service coordination is a vital component of case management and must be
              documented. The Case Manager works together with the participant, and/or
              Authorized Representative and other agencies involved in the participant's care to
              ensure services:

              •        are appropriate for the participant's needs;

              •        meet acceptable quality standards;

Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                       Page 11
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                               November 1, 2022


              •        are not duplicated;

              •        are cost effective alternatives;

              •        maximize the utilization of available resources;

              •        are provided by other agencies in accordance with maintenance of effort
                       agreements (Refer to Section 07.21); and,

              •        augment, not replace, the participant's informal support system.

      05.35       Monitoring

              The Case Manager monitors the plan for each waiver participant at least monthly.
              Monitoring should be accomplished through contacts with the participant and/or
              Authorized Representative. If the Case Manager is unable to contact the participant
              and/or after three (3) attempts on different days, at different times, within 10 business
              days, approval may be obtained and documented in the Phoenix narrative from the
              Lead Team Case Manager, Lead Team Nurse Consultant or Area
              Administrator to make the required contact with the Authorized Representative.
              The Case Manager should contact formal support providers as often as the need
              arises. Minimally, there should be contact with in-home care providers initially and
              at the re-evaluation visit. These contacts must be documented in the narrative.
              Participant’s satisfaction with and adequacy of services should be discussed with the
              participant, and/or Authorized Representative during the initial visit and monthly
              thereafter. This discussion should be included in the narrative.

              All visits and monthly contacts must be conducted between the hours of 7 a.m. and
              7 p.m., Monday through Friday unless the participant/Authorized Representative
              cannot be accommodated during this timeframe.

              Note: Any exception must be prior approved and documented in the Phoenix
                    narrative by the Area Administrator and/or Central Office
                    Representative. Any exception must be for the benefit of the participant and
                    not for the convenience of the Case Manager.

              The Case Manager must monitor each participant monthly. At a minimum, the Case
              Manager must contact the participant via phone the first two months of the quarter
              and visit the participant the last month of the quarter.

              The Case Manager must complete the following items during the Monthly
              Contact.



Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                        Page 12
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                            November 1, 2022


             Monthly Contact:

             •      Phone the participant and/or Authorized Representative to discuss the
                    participant’s current health-impairment, appropriateness of the Service Plan
                    and provision of formal and informal services at the level committed to. If a
                    change in the health status does not affect the level of care or service plan,
                    document this change in the narrative. If the change affects the service plan
                    but not level of care, document the change in the Service Plan comments. If
                    the change affects level of care, a re-evaluation must be completed.

             •      Review Phoenix Claims and Reports for missed visits, exception codes,
                    service delivery, services provided as authorized during correct dates and
                    times, check-in and check-out from authorized phone, visits that are longer
                    or shorter than authorized. This may be completed by viewing the Claims
                    Section in Phoenix or by obtaining an activity report in Phoenix. This review
                    may not be completed more than seven (7) business days prior to the
                    contact. This monitoring of claims must be completed covering the time
                    period since the last monitoring. Trends and patterns of problems rather than
                    isolated cases should be noticed.

             •      Review Phoenix Claims and Reports to monitor activities task sheets and
                    activities observations. This may be completed by reviewing Phoenix
                    Reports then Claims. This review may not be completed more than (7)
                    business days prior to the contact.

             •      Verify Medicaid financial eligibility for waiver services. It is important for the
                    Case Manager to check their dashboard often to monitor participants’
                    Medicaid eligibility.

             •      Any follow up activities and subsequent actions required as a result of
                    participant needs or provider compliance problems identified must be
                    documented in the narrative record.

             •      Complete Monthly Contact Narrative including Checklist in Phoenix.

             Quarterly Visit

             The Case Manager must ensure that quarterly visits are completed timely and
             efficiently. The first Quarterly Visit is due within ninety (90) calendar days of
             waiver enrollment and subsequently every ninety (90) calendar days until re-
             evaluation, which resets the cycle.

             Exception: If the Quarterly Visit is due within five (5) business days of the on-
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                     Page 13
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                                November 1, 2022

                            going Case Management referral, the on-going Case Manager must
                            complete the Quarterly Visit within ten (10) business days of accepting
                            the referral. The late activity will not be subject to strikes or recoupment
                            for timeliness of the visit if made within ten (10) business days of
                            referral acceptance.

                            If the participant is hospitalized at the time of the scheduled quarterly
                            visit, the visit should be delayed until the participant is discharged. A
                            visit is due within seven (7) business days of notification of discharge
                            and narration of the visit delay must be completed.

             The Case Manager must complete the following items during the Quarterly
             Visit.

             Quarterly Visit:

             •      Visit participant at place of residence.

             •      If a quarterly visit in a location other than the participant’s residence would
                    benefit the participant and/or Authorized Representative, the Case Manager
                    must request an exception from the Lead Team Case Manager, Lead Team
                    Nurse Consultant, Satellite Office Supervisor or Area Administrator.
                    The approval or denial must be documented in the narrative. The approval
                    or denial is valid for one time. The phone number for this alternate location
                    must not be entered in Phoenix as an acceptable number for the Electronic
                    Visit Verification (EVV).

             •      Complete documentation in the EVV by using the participant’s landline
                    phone for check-in and check-out or by using the EVV Mobile Phone
                    Application. The participant’s mobile phone must not be used for check-in
                    and check-out.

             •      The EVV check-in call must be made at the beginning of the visit AND a
                    check-out call must be made at the end of the visit.


             •       In cases where visits are made for more than one person in the same house,
                    the Case Manager should check-in and check-out for one person at a time,
                    not overlapping service/visit times to EVV.

             •      Review Assessment Information and add updates or additional information
                    in the assessment comment field.

             •      Review the Person-Centered Service Plan and revise as needed.
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                         Page 14
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                            November 1, 2022



             •      Obtain signature of participant and/or Authorized Representative on the
                    Service Plan Agreement at the first quarterly visit following the Re-
                    evaluation.

             •      If no revisions are made, leave a copy of Service Plan with participant and/or
                    Authorized Representative. If revisions are necessary, mail a copy of the
                    revised Service Plan to the participant and/or Authorized Representative
                    following the visit.

             •      Notify the providers of any Service Plan changes via phone call or
                    conversation feature in Phoenix. The provider can access the updated Service
                    Plan in Phoenix.

             •      Review, update and complete Waiver Service and Non-Waiver Service
                    (Referrals/Authorizations) tabs in Phoenix.

             •      Review Phoenix Claims and Reports missed visits, exception codes, service
                    delivery, service provided as authorized during correct dates and times,
                    check-in and check-out from authorized phone, visits that are longer or
                    shorter than authorized. This may be completed by viewing the Claims
                    Section in Phoenix or by obtaining an activity report in Phoenix. This review
                    may not be completed more than seven (7) business days prior to the
                    contact. This monitoring of claims must be completed covering the time
                    period since the last monitoring. Trends and patterns of problems rather than
                    isolated cases should be noted.

             •      Review Phoenix Claim and Reports to monitor activities task-sheets and
                    activities observations. This may be completed by viewing Phoenix reports
                    then Claims. This review may not be completed more than seven (7) business
                    days prior to the contact.

             •      Verify Medicaid financial eligibility for waiver services. It is important for the
                    Case Manager to check their dashboard often to monitor participants’
                    Medicaid eligibility.

             •      Verify choice of location of services. Must obtain participant signature on
                    CLTC Participant Service Choice form if previous choices were obtained by
                    verbal consent.

             •      Review, complete and update Participant Information Section in Phoenix.


Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                    Page 15
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                          November 1, 2022

             •      Review, complete and update Medication Section in Phoenix.

             •      Review, complete and update Home Assessment Section in Phoenix.

             •      Review, complete and update as needed At Risk for Missed Personal Care II
                    status in Phoenix.

             •      Review complete and update as needed Emergency Disaster Priority status
                    in Home Assessment under Home Condition tab.


             •      Review, complete and update as needed Emergency Disaster Preparedness
                    Section in Home Assessment under Home Condition tab. In the Disaster Plan
                    Box, record the full name, address and phone number of the individual
                    responsible for assisting the participant in the event of an
                    emergency/disaster.

             •      Review, complete and update as needed Caregiver Support Section in
                    Phoenix. If no Authorized Representatives are listed, the participant should
                    select the appropriate box on the Appointing an Authorized Representative
                    Form 1282 LTL to verify the section was reviewed.

             •      Discuss the participant’s Personal Goals. Document any newly stated
                    Personal Goals in the Personal Goals Section in the Service Plan including
                    the steps to achieve the Personal Goal. Personal Goals must be time specific,
                    measurable and realistic. Review and document participant’s progress
                    toward previously stated Personal Goals. If the participant does not indicate
                    a Personal Goal, document in the narrative checklist.

             •      During the check-out call through the EVV, enter the activity completed and
                    any new observations. Only new observations that represent a significant
                    change should be entered.

             •      Any follow up activities and subsequent actions required as a result of
                    participant needs or provider compliance problem identified must be
                    documented in the narrative record.

             •      Complete Quarterly Visit narrative and narrative checklist in Phoenix.

             Some participants may require more monitoring than others. Frequency of contacts
             should be determined by prioritizing participants whose medical conditions are
             unstable, participants who require complex service plans, and/or participants who
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                   Page 16
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                            November 1, 2022

             have limited support systems.

             A participant has the right to assume risk, commensurate with his/her ability and
             willingness to assume responsibility for the consequences of that risk. This, of
             course, does not abrogate a state’s statutory duty to ensure the health and welfare of
             individuals served under home and community based services waivers. Staff should
             exercise good professional judgment in dealing with cases where the participant’s
             health, safety, and welfare are questionable. These cases should be staffed with
             designated Lead Team and/or Area Administrator. Central Office should also be
             consulted. Legal counsel may be needed. Established policy (participant choice,
             monitoring, participant at risk, or non–compliant participant) must be followed.
             Documentation is crucial in these cases. Referrals must be made to other agencies
             (DMH, DSS, etc.) as appropriate and/or as required by State Law.

             For home environments which have been determined to be unsafe or potentially
             unsafe for the Case Manager, a monitoring strategy should be developed with the
             designated Lead Team and Area Administrator based on the CLTC Procedure
             Manual Safety Policy.

         05.35.10   Monitoring for Missed PCII Visit, Emergency/Disaster Priority and
                    Emergency/Disaster Preparedness

                    As part of the ongoing case monitoring process, the Case Manager must
                    identify the participant with special needs and/or inadequate supports. The
                    participant may require special intervention in the event of a missed PCII
                    visit or emergency/disaster.


                    At-Risk for Missed Personal Care II Visit Participant

                    A participant at risk for a missed Personal Care II visit is one whose health
                    and safety could be compromised if the service is not provided as scheduled.
                    Some examples are:

                    •       Diabetic participant who resides alone, is unable to prepare a meal,
                            must eat at specific times and the Personal Care II is responsible for
                            preparing the meal.

                    •       An incontinent participant who relies solely on the Personal Care
                            II to perform bathing and toileting.


                    •       A bedbound participant who relies solely on the Personal Care II to
                            perform activities of daily living and meal preparations.

                    If a participant is determined by the Case Manager to be "At Risk for a
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                     Page 17
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                            November 1, 2022

                    Missed PCII visit," this information must be communicated to the provider
                    at the time of the referral and any time the status changes. The At-Risk status
                    for Missed Personal Care II Visit is keyed in the Participant Information
                    section of Phoenix. This will flag appropriate Service Authorizations to alert
                    providers of the At- Risk Personal Care II visit status. Service planning must
                    address this special need of the participant. (Refer to Section 05.33 and
                    07.23)

                    The provider is required to contact the Case Manager if services cannot be
                    provided to the participant as authorized and backup efforts have failed. The
                    Case Manager must respond immediately in an attempt to secure the
                    assistance needed by the participant. Efforts to secure assistance must be
                    documented in the Narrative.

                    At a minimum, interventions will typically include:

                    •       contacting participant and/or Authorized Representative to assess the
                            situation; efforts should be made to involve the participant and/or
                            Authorized Representative in identifying possible solutions;

                    •       reviewing the Service Plan for other informal support systems which
                            could be contacted to assist the participant; and/or

                    •       exploring a change in the PCII provider or authorizing an alternate
                            service on an emergency basis (i.e., ADHC).

                    •       Participants who have been coded as “At Risk for Missed Personal
                            Care II” in Phoenix may be identified using the Case Manager Roster
                            Report, Personal Care II Visit Status.

                    •       Service Planning must address this special need of the participant.

                    Emergency/Disaster Priority

                    The Emergency/Disaster Priority Section in the Home Assessment section
                    under Home Condition tab of Phoenix must be reviewed and updated as
                    necessary, and at least during the Initial Visit, each Quarterly Visit and Re-
                    Evaluation Visit.

                    The Emergency/Disaster Priority status is entered in Phoenix according to
                    the description below. Service planning is required in an attempt to meet the
                    needs of a participant who would be vulnerable during an
                    emergency/disaster.

                    1.      Not Priority - Participant is not vulnerable during emergency/disaster
                            or has adequate supports to meet needs. (Example: Participant has
                            functional deficits but family is willing and able to evacuate and/or
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                     Page 18
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                            November 1, 2022

                            meets needs.)

                     2.     Priority/Lives Alone – Participant lives alone and is vulnerable in
                            emergency/disaster due to limitation of support system. (Example:
                            Participant lives alone and has no one available to assist with
                            evacuation or has no one to administer medications.) If this is chosen,
                            answer the question in Phoenix either yes or no “Participant consents
                            to have emergency preparedness agencies notified.”

                     3.     Priority/Advanced Medical Need – Participant has advanced medical
                            needs and would be vulnerable during an emergency/disaster.
                            (Example: Participant is ventilator dependent, require dialysis or
                            other specialized equipment or services.) If this is chosen, answer the
                            question in Phoenix either yes or no “Participant consents to have
                            emergency preparedness agencies notified.”

                     4.     Priority/Other – Participant has special needs as identified by the Case
                            Manager and/or Nurse Consultant, and would be vulnerable during
                            emergency/disaster. (Example: Participant can only be transported by
                            ambulance or participant with special communication needs.) If this is
                            chosen, answer the question in Phoenix either yes or no “Participant
                            consents to have emergency preparedness agencies notified.”
                     Emergency /Disaster Preparedness

                     The Emergency/Disaster Preparedness Section in the Home Assessment
                     section under Home Condition tab of Phoenix must be reviewed and updated
                     as necessary, and at least during the Initial Visit, each Quarterly Visit and
                     Re-evaluation Visit. If the participant plans to remain in the home during an
                     emergency/disaster, the checklist for goods and services must be completed.
                     Only goods and services which are not already available in the home and
                     would be needed in the event of an emergency/disaster should be checked.
                     The full name, address and telephone number of the individual responsible
                     for assisting the participant in the event of an emergency/disaster must be
                     included in the Disaster Plan Box.

                     The Pre-Disaster Checklist and Post-Disaster Checklist

                     The Pre-Disaster Checklist and Post-Disaster Checklist will be used to
                     document and report Pre-Disaster and Post-Disaster efforts when an
                     emergency or disaster is imminent and the Emergency/Disaster Plan has been
                     implemented by Central Office or the Area Office.

      05.36    Assessment Completion at Re-Evaluation

              The Assessment is used to re-determine a waiver participant's long-term care needs.
              Information obtained during the re-evaluation process should be adequate for the
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                     Page 19
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                             November 1, 2022

              Case Manager to re-determine the participant's level of care, service planning, and
              service needs.

              It is the Case Manager’s responsibility to ensure the assessment is completed
              accurately and thoroughly before a level of care is determined.

      05.37       Re-Evaluation at 365-Day Intervals

              The Case Manager will schedule re-evaluation visits in a timely manner to allow
              completion of all re-evaluation activities within the three hundred and sixty-five
              (365) calendar day time frame to complete re-evaluations for all waiver
              participants. The re- evaluation visit due date for participants receiving case
              management, is scheduled by Phoenix for completion every three hundred and
              sixty-five (365) calendar days. The three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar
              day cycle begins with the last assessment completed by the Nurse Consultant
              prior to waiver enrollment. Subsequent re-evaluations will be scheduled three
              hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar days from the date the last assessment was
              completed. The completed assessment for re-evaluation visit, levels of care, and
              service plans must be completed by the due date. When the re-evaluation is
              conducted on a date other than the due date, the three hundred and sixty-five (365)
              calendar day cycle will be adjusted and subsequent re-evaluations will be scheduled
              three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar days from the date the last assessment
              was completed.

              Re-evaluation Visit

              The Case Manager must complete the Re-evaluation Visit with the participant by
              the three hundred and sixty-fifth (365th) calendar day from the last assessment. All
              data (assessment, service plan and narrative) must be uploaded to Phoenix by
              the three hundred and sixty-fifth (365th) calendar day.
              NOTE: All waiver documentation for the month must be keyed, entered and
              uploaded to the network by 11:59 pm of the last day of each month. This supersedes
              any documentation timeliness and policy guidelines. For example, documentation
              related to re-evaluations completed the last week of the month but not due until the
              first week of the following month, must be completed by 11:59 pm of the month the
              visit was completed.

              The Case Manager must complete the following items during the Re-evaluation
              Visit.

              Re-evaluation Visit:

              •        Visit participant at the place of residence.

              •        If a re-evaluation visit in a location other than the participant’s residence
                       would benefit the participant and/or Authorized Representative, the Case
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                      Page 20
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                            November 1, 2022

                    Manager must request an exception from the Lead Team, Lead Team
                    Nurse Consultant, Satellite Office Supervisor or Area Administrator.
                    The approval or denial must be documented in the narrative. The approval or
                    denial is valid for one time. The phone number for this alternate location
                    must not be entered in Phoenix as an accepted number for the Electronic Visit
                    Verification (EVV).

             •      Complete documentation in the EVV by using the participant’s landline
                    phone for check-in and check-out or by using the EVV Mobile Phone
                    Application. The participant’s mobile phone must not be used for check-in and
                    check-out.

             •      The EVV check-in call must be made at the beginning of the visit AND a
                    check-out call must be made at the end of the visit.

             •      In cases where visits are made for more than one person in the same home,
                    the Case Manager should check-in and check-out for one person at a time not
                    overlapping calls through the EVV.

             •      Complete a new Assessment at re-evaluation.

             •      Determine the Level of Care and complete the Level of Care staffing.

             •      Develop a new Person-Centered Service Plan with input and participation
                    from the participant/Authorized Representative and others if requested by
                    the participant/Authorized Representative.

             •       All Re-evaluation activities must be completed by the three hundred and
                    sixty-fifth (365th)) day.

             •      Complete Service Coordination and narrate contacts made.

             •      Review, update and complete Waiver Service and Non-Waiver Service
                    (Referrals/Authorizations) tabs in Phoenix.

             •      Review Phoenix Claim and Report for missed visits, exception codes, service
                    delivery, service provided as authorized during correct dates and times,
                    check-in and check-out from authorized phone, visits that are longer or shorter
                    than authorized. This may be completed by viewing the Claims Section in
                    Phoenix or by obtaining an activity report in Phoenix. This review may not
                    be completed more than seven (7) business days prior to the contact. This
                    monitoring of claims must be completed covering the time period since the
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                     Page 21
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                             November 1, 2022

                    last monitoring. Trends and patterns of problems rather than isolated cases
                    should be noted.

             •      Review Phoenix Claims and Reports to monitor activities task sheets and
                    activities observations. This may be completed by viewing Phoenix Reports
                    then Claims. This review may not be completed more than seven (7)
                    business days prior to the contact.

             •      Verify Medicaid financial eligibility for waiver services. It is important for the
                    Case Manager to check their dashboard often to monitor participants’
                    Medicaid eligibility.

             •      Verify choice of location of services. Must obtain participant signature on
                    CLTC Participant Service Choice form if previous choices were obtained by
                    verbal consent.

             •      Review, complete and update Participant Information Section in Phoenix.

             •      Review, complete and update Home Assessment in Phoenix.

             •      Review, complete and update as needed At Risk for Missed Personal Care II
                    status in Phoenix.

             •      Review, complete and update as needed Emergency Disaster Priority status
                    in Home Assessment under the Home Condition tab.

             •      Review, complete and update as needed Emergency Disaster Preparedness
                    Section in Home Assessment under the Home Condition tab. In the Disaster
                    Plan Box, record the full name, address and phone number of the individual
                    responsible for assisting the participant in the event of an emergency/disaster.

             •      Review, complete and update as needed Caregiver Support Section in
                    Phoenix. If no Authorized Representatives are listed, the participant should
                    select the appropriate box on the Appointing an Authorized Representative
                    Form 1282 LTL to verify the section was reviewed.

             •      Discuss the participant’s Personal Goals. Document any newly stated
                    Personal Goals in the Personal Goals section of the Service Plan including
                    the steps to achieve Personal Goals. Personal Goals must be time specific,
                    measurable and realistic. Review and document participant progress towards
                    previously stated Personal Goals. If the participant does not indicate a
                    Personal Goal, document in the narrative checklist.
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                      Page 22
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                             November 1, 2022


             •      During the check-out call through the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV), enter
                    the activity completed and any new observations. Only new observations that
                    represent a significant change should be entered.

             •      Any follow up activities and subsequent actions required as a result of
                    participant needs or provider compliance problems identified must be
                    documented in the narrative record.



             •      Complete and send any pertinent communication such as Service
                    Authorization /Termination, Service Plan, Physician’s Order or Notification
                    Form.

             •      Complete Re-evaluation Visit narrative and narrative checklist in Phoenix.

         05.37.10   Hospitalized Waiver Participant Who is Due an Initial Visit or
                    Re-evaluation Visit

                    If a participant is hospitalized at the time of the regularly scheduled Initial
                    Visit, Quarterly Visit or Re-evaluation Visit, the visit should be delayed until
                    discharge. Regular case management activities, except a monthly phone
                    contact, must be interrupted during hospitalization. This contact must be
                    documented in the narrative. All other waiver services must be interrupted or
                    terminated according to the professional judgment of the Case Manager.

                    The Initial Visit or Re-evaluation visit is due within seven (7) business days
                    of the notification of the participant's discharge from the hospital. At this
                    time, a complete review of the case is required. All activities required during
                    the Initial Visit or the re-evaluation visit must be completed. The Service Plan
                    must be completed within seven (7) business days of the assessment
                    completion. The Initial Visit or Re- evaluation Visit must be completed with
                    verification of the participant's locus choice and Medicaid financial
                    eligibility. The three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar day cycle will be
                    adjusted and subsequent re-evaluations will be scheduled three hundred and
                    sixty- five (365) calendar days from the date the assessment was completed
                    following discharge.

         05.37.20   Re-Evaluation with Interruption of 365-Day Cycle Due to ADL/Medical
                    Changes

                    It may be necessary, due to reported or observed changes in a participant's
                    condition, to complete a Re-evaluation before the Re- evaluation is due. This
                    Re-evaluation must be completed at the participant’s home. A re-evaluation
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                      Page 23
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                               November 1, 2022

                       must include a re-determination of the participant’s level of care and service
                       needs, verification of locus choice, and verification of Medicaid financial
                       eligibility. Contact must be made with identified agencies and/or providers
                       to ensure service coordination. (Refer to Section 05.34.) A new Person-
                       Centered Service Plan must be developed at each re-evaluation. A copy of the
                       new Service Plan will be mailed to the participant and/or Authorized
                       Representative. If the re-evaluation is completed prior to the month that it is
                       due, the next re-evaluation will be due three hundred and sixty-five (365)
                       calendar days from the date the re-evaluation was completed. When a re-
                       evaluation is completed instead of another activity due, the re- evaluation
                       narrative checklist will be completed. For example, if a Re- evaluation is
                       completed when an Initial Visit is due, complete the Re- evaluation checklist
                       instead of the Initial Visit checklist.

      05.38       Waiver Participant Determined as Medically Ineligible

              If a waiver participant appears to be medically ineligible, the Case Manager must
              complete the following tasks:

              •        Obtain medical information from the physician by mailing or faxing
                       the Physician’s Input Letter and the CLTC Consent Form 121.

              •        Re-visit participant for clarification as necessary which may include a
                       face- to-face visit by a SCDHHS Worker.

              •        Conduct a team conference with a SCDHHS Worker to reach a joint level
                       of care decision. If the assessment was completed by a SCDHHS Worker,
                       the team conference will be completed by two SCDHHS Worker.

              •        If a level of care decision cannot be reached, consult with the Area
                       Administrator. If the case cannot be resolved at the Area Office level or if
                       efforts to verify medical information with physician are unsuccessful, the
                       Area Administrator will forward the case to Waiver Service Exceptions
                       (via email WES@scdhhs.gov).

              •        Complete the Level of Care section in Phoenix.

              •        Discuss Level of Care decision and possible alternatives with
                       participant and/or Authorized Representative.

              •        Notify all providers of case closure via phone call or Phoenix
                       Conversation. Case Manager is responsible for sending a CLTC
                       Notification Form171 to central Medicaid Eligibility to notify them of the
                       case closure.

              •        Send a Client Notification Form to participant/Authorized Representative
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                        Page 24
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                               November 1, 2022

                     informing them of case closure. Participant/Authorized Representative has
                     ten (10) business days to respond from the date of the notification.

             Note: Participant can continue to receive services through date of case
                   closure.

             •       Document all activities in the Narrative.

             •       Terminate all services in Phoenix effective date of case closure.

             •       Email the designated Support Staff for RSP closure.

             If the participant chooses to appeal the decision prior to the date of termination (within
             the ten (10) business day notice period) and notifies the Case Manager and requests
             continue benefits, the participant may continue to participate in the waiver pending
             an appeal hearing if the date of action has passed. For example, if a participant is
                                                     th
             given notification on September 5 that the case will be terminated effective
             September 15th and the participant appeals the decision prior to September 15th,
             services may remain in place pending the appeal hearing decision. If the participant
             files an appeal after September 15th and termination has already occurred, services
             will not be resumed. Services would only be resumed following the hearing, if the
             hearing officer’s decision is in favor of the participant.

         05.38.10    Financial Ineligibility

                     If at any point a waiver participant becomes financially ineligible for waiver
                     services, all services must be terminated and the case must be closed effective
                     the last date of financial eligibility.

                     If Case Manager receives notification that a waiver participant’s financial
                     eligibility is in question, Case Manager must complete the following tasks:

                     •       Document verification of financial ineligibility via MMIS screen,
                             letter from Social Security Administration, or written notice from
                             Medicaid Eligibility.

                     •       Notify involved agencies by telephone call of participant’s
                             termination from CLTC program.

                     •       Contact participant/Authorized Representative to discuss
                             termination, possible alternatives, and referral to other agencies.

                     •       Complete a CLTC Notification Form 171 to notify participant and/or
                             Authorized Representative indicating the date of termination will be
                             the date of financial ineligibility. An Appeals Notice will not be
                             included with this notification. Case Manager is responsible for
                             sending a CLTC Notification Form 171 to central Medicaid
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                        Page 25
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                           November 1, 2022

                            Eligibility to notify them of the case closure.

                    •       Document all activities in the Narrative.

                    •       Terminate all waiver services in Phoenix effective no later than the
                            same date as financial ineligibility.

                    •       Complete Status Changes section of Phoenix to terminate case as
                            “Financially Ineligible.”

                    A waiver participant who loses financial eligibility for Medicaid for no more
                    than one month due to excess resources, lump sum payment, etc., and is
                    closed to waiver, can immediately be re-entered into the waiver after both
                    financial and medical eligibility have been re-established and verified. A new
                    application must be made with community locus choice and assigned to a
                    SCDHHS Worker. Normal intake, assessment procedures and timeliness
                    standards will be followed.

                     Note: If the case is closed for seven (7) business days or less, a problem
                           may be reported in Phoenix to determine if the case may be re-
                           opened without a new application.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                    Page 26
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                                  November 1, 2022

05.40     Institutionalization of a Waiver Participant

        If Medicaid sponsorship is required for nursing home placement, the individual must be
        referred to Centralized Intake for a nursing home placement application. The individual will
        have more than one application active in Phoenix, one assigned to the Case Manager and
        one assigned to the SCDHHS Worker. The Case Manager and SCDHHS Worker must
        coordinate the case activities and communicate regarding nursing home placement.

        Institutionalization of Waiver Participant for Less than a Full Calendar Month

        If a waiver participant is hospitalized or institutionalized (i.e., rehabilitation center, nursing
        home, DDSN/DMH facility) for a planned, temporary stay not to exceed one full calendar
        month, the waiver application should remain open. (Participant remains in a waiver slot and
        open in Phoenix.) However, case management activities must be interrupted during the
        period of hospitalization or institutionalization with the exception of a monthly phone
        contact by the assigned Case Manager. This contact regarding the participant’s status
        should be documented in the narrative. All other waivered services must be either
        interrupted or terminated (Refer to Section 07.26) according to the professional judgment
        of the Case Manager.

        If the participant is discharged from the hospital or institution by the end of the last day of
        the full calendar month, the waiver services may be resumed. Upon discharge the Case
        Manager verifies and documents the participant's status, updates the service plan, and
        authorizes (or reinstates) services as appropriate. It may be necessary, due to reported
        changes in the participant's condition to complete a re-evaluation. This can be accomplished
        by completing the Assessment, re-determining the level of care, and reviewing the service
        needs. (Refer to Section 05.37)

        Institutionalization of a Waiver Participant for More than a Full Calendar Month

        Note:    A full calendar month is defined as from the first instant of the month throughout
                 the last instant of the month. For example, if a participant enters a facility before
                 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on the first calendar day of April and remains throughout the
                 end of April, then waiver closure must occur April 30th. However, if the participant
                 enters a facility after 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on April 1st or on any other calendar
                 day in April, waiver closure must occur on May 31st.

        If the participant remains hospitalized or institutionalized for a full calendar month, the
        waiver application must be closed to the waiver effective no later than the last day of the
        full calendar month period and the services, which were previously interrupted, must be
        terminated. This participant must be closed to the waiver as “Exceeded Full Calendar
        Month” in Phoenix. In order to facilitate waiver re-entry for the participant expected to
        return to the community, the Case Manager will send (at time of waiver termination) a
        CLTC Notification Form 171 to the participant and/or Authorized Representative,
        requesting that CLTC be notified of participant's impending discharge. Case Manager is
        responsible for sending a CLTC Notification Form 171 to central Medicaid Eligibility to
        notify them of the case closure.
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                           Page 27
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                          November 1, 2022


      05.41 Incarceration of a Waiver Participant

             If the Case Manager learns that the waiver participant is incarcerated (in jail or
             prison), all waiver services except Case Management must be terminated
             immediately. The participant must be closed to the waiver by or on the last calendar
             day of the month. No services (including Case Management) may be billed in the
             following month.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                   Page 28
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                             November 1, 2022


05.50   Non-Compliant Participant

        If a participant and/or or Authorized Representative refuses to cooperate with the CLTC
        Program, and all alternatives (i.e., counseling, personal contracts, referrals to DSS Adult
        Protective Services, interagency team staffing, case manager/supervisory visits, etc.) have
        been exhausted, termination of a waiver service and/or termination from the CLTC Program
        may be appropriate.

        Examples of non-compliance include but are not limited to:

        •      Repeated refusal to cooperate with providers and/or Case Manager;

        •      Repeated incidences of non-compliance with the service plan;

        •      Physical abuse or repeated verbal abuse toward provider and/or Case
               Manager; or

                Conduct which adversely impacts the program's ability to ensure service
               provision or to ensure the participant's health or the safety of the CLTC
               representative.

               If termination of a waiver service for non-compliance is being considered, the
               following must occur:

        •      All efforts to work with the participant and/or Authorized Representative must be
               documented;

        •      Termination of service must have prior approval of Area Administrator or Lead
               Team Designee and documented in the Phoenix narrative;

        •      A CLTC Notification form must be approved by The Regional CLTC Director and
               documented in the Phoenix narrative prior to mailing;

        •      Participant must be notified of termination of waiver services on the CLTC
               Notification; and,

        •      The Service Provision Form terminating service(s) must be sent to the provider(s).

               If termination from the waiver for non-compliance is being considered, the
               following must occur:

        •      The participant and/or Authorized Representative must be notified in writing by
               certified mail and regular (First Class) US mail of the program requirements, advised
               of potential consequences of continued non-compliance and given an opportunity to
               remedy the circumstances. The letter must have approval from the Regional CLTC
Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                      Page 29
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                        November 1, 2022

             Director prior to sending to the participant;

      •      All efforts to work with the participant and/or Authorized Representative must be
             carefully documented; and,

      •      Termination must be prior approved and documented by the designated Lead Team
             member, Area Administrator and Regional CLTC Director.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                Page 30
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                                 November 1, 2022


05.60    Leave of Absence from the State/CLTC Region of a Waiver Participant


         Individuals enrolled in Medicaid home and community-based waivers who travel out-of-
         state may retain a waiver slot under the following conditions:

        1.     The trip out-of-state is a planned, temporary stay, not to exceed ninety (90)
               consecutive calendar days which are authorized prior to departure; and

        2.     The Case Manager receives notification and approves the service prior to the travel.

        3.     The individual continues to receive a waiver service; and,

        4.     Waiver services are limited to the frequency of services currently approved in the
               participant’s plan of service (No additional hours will be authorized for vacation);
               and,

        5.     Waiver services must be rendered by South Carolina Medicaid providers and,


        Note: If the Personal Care II or attendant normally uses the participant’s landline in the
               home for Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) check-in and check-out, and the travel
               is prior approved by the Case manager then a cell phone is allowable to use for
               check-in and check-out for the service.

        6.     The individual must remain Medicaid eligible in the State of South Carolina.

        The required waiver monitoring must continue to ensure the participant’s health and
        welfare.

        If a participant is in another state temporarily, waiver services must be interrupted or
        terminated, according to the professional judgment of the Case Manager, with the
        exception of Case Management and possibly PCII or Attendant Care. Documentation of the
        participant’s status and verification of the participant’s intent to return should be completed
        during the monthly phone contact.

        If a participant is out-of-CLTC region or out-of-state at the time of a regularly scheduled re-
        evaluation or for an initial visit, the re-evaluation or initial visit should be completed early
        if possible but maybe delayed until the participant returns. If delayed the re-evaluation or
        initial visit must be completed within seven (7) business days of when CLTC is made aware
        of the participant’s return to the CLTC region or state. If the participant continues to remain
        out-of-state after ninety (90) calendar days have elapsed, the case must be closed to the
        waiver and all waiver services terminated.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                         Page 31
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                           November 1, 2022




      If a participant is in another CLTC region temporarily, the assigned Case Manager may
      negotiate with the involved service provider(s) to coordinate continued services. Regular
      case management activities, including (at a minimum) a monthly phone contact by the
      assigned Case Manager and documentation of the participant’s status, should
      continue. Verification of the participant’s intent to return should also be made during the
      monthly contact. If the participant remains in another CLTC region for more than ninety
      (90) calendar days, the case will be transferred to that CLTC office or closed to the waiver
      and all waiver services terminated.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                    Page 32
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                             November 1, 2022



05.70 Interactions with Hospice

      A participant can be in a waiver and be enrolled in the Hospice Benefit at the same time but
      is limited in the services that may be authorized. (See Hospice Benefits Interaction Section.)
      If it is learned that a participant has been receiving services not allowed on the Hospice
      Benefits Interaction Table, the service(s) must be terminated immediately using the calendar
      day the information was received as the termination date. For example: Participant admitted
      to Hospice on 04/15/2016 and on-going Case Manager notified on 04/30/2016 of hospice
      admission. Personal Care II, Personal Care I, briefs, med pads and adult wipes are terminated
      effective 04/30/2016 to coincide with the date the Case Manager was notified of the hospice
      admission.

      A participant, who has been admitted to a Hospice House, may receive Case Management
      service but no other waiver services. All monitoring activities continue as
      scheduled, including visits. The waiver application does not need to be closed for “Exceeds
      Full Calendar Month”.

      Note: Palliative Care is not considered to be Hospice Care.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                      Page 33
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                                    November 1, 2022


05.80       Process for Critical Incidents

        A Critical Incident is any actual or alleged event or situation that creates a significant risk
        of substantial or serious harm to the physical or mental health, safety or well-being of a
        SCDHHS waiver participant, Home Again participant or PRIME participant.

        State workers or Provider Case Managers have a duty to report critical incidents if they
        have reason to believe that a vulnerable adult or child is being abused, exploited or
        neglected. State worker or Provider Case Managers must submit the critical
        incident in Phoenix within 24 hours or the next business day after discovery of the
        suspected or alleged abuse, neglect or exploitation.

        SCDHHS also monitors for other reportable incidents. These are defined as incidents
        involving death or serious harm to a beneficiary/participant. Reportable incidents
        include:

        •         Abuse (intentionally inflicting or allowing to be inflicted physical injury on
                  a vulnerable adult or child by an act or failure to act. Deliberately subjecting
                  a vulnerable adult or child to threats or harassment or other forms of
                  intimidating behavior. Abuse can be physical, verbal, psychological or
                  sexual)

        •         Neglect (the failure or omission of a caregiver to provide the care, goods, or
                  services necessary to maintain the health or safety of a vulnerable adult or child)

        •         Exploitation (causing or requiring a vulnerable adult or child to engage in activity
                  or labor which is against the reasonable and rational wishes of the vulnerable adult
                  or child. Includes the improper, unlawful, or unauthorized use of funds, assets,
                  property, power of attorney, guardianship, or conservatorship of a vulnerable adult
                  or child by someone for the profit or advantage of that person or another person

        •         Unexplained deaths

        •         Falls (resulting in death, injury requiring hospitalization, injury that will
                  result in permanent loss of function)
        •         Traumatic injuries (e.g., third degree burns over more than ten (10%) percent of
                  the body that result in death, require hospitalization, or result in a loss of
                  function)

        •         Unauthorized restraints (both chemical and physical, that results in
                  death, hospitalization, or loss of function in an institutional setting
                  only)


Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                            Page 34
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                            November 1, 2022

      •      Media related events (any report that presents a potential or harmful
             characterization of the Department of Health and Human Services or any of its
             contracted entities that involves a SCDHHS waiver participant, Home Again
             participant or PRIME participant)

      •      Infectious disease outbreak

      •      Elopement (unexplained absence for more than 24 hours)

      Note: If the CLTC Case Manager/Nurse Consultant is unsuccessful in collaborating
             consistently with the APS Supervisor or the APS Case Manager, the Case Manager
             or Nurse Consultant will report the problem to the Area Administrator or to the
             Lead Team who will contact the APS Supervisor or the APS Case Manager. If this is
             not successful, the Area Administrator or Lead Team should contact the Regional
             APS Consultant and if this is not successful, the Area Administrator or Lead Team
             should contact SCDHHS Quality Assurance Team for assistance.

      Process for Recording a Critical Incident:

      •      State worker or Provider Case Manager will pull the participant record and on
             the carousel and select “Critical Incidents”

      •      Select “New Critical Incident”

      •      Select Program – Only programs with active applications for the participant will show

      •      Select Critical Incident Type - Only one type can be chosen, see list below

      •      Incident Date – Date that the occurrence happened, not date that it is being reported

      •      Description – Mandatory. Provide details of the incident and all involved
             parties along with their relationship to the participant

      •      Source of Information: Source name, Relationship to participant and phone number

      Note: The Confidential box should be selected when the critical incident identifies and
            reports on a Provider Case Manager.


      Tracking of Critical Incidents by State Workers and Provider Case Managers:

      •      Abuse, Neglect, Exploitation – at a minimum, monthly update from APS. To
             continue until APS provides a closure date or notifies of a report not accepted after
             45 calendar day investigation

Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                    Page 35
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                          November 1, 2022

      •      Death, Falls, Traumatic injuries and Unauthorized Restraint – Single entry,
             no additional tracking required

      •      Media-related events and Elopement – at a minimum, weekly update until resolved
      There will not be a notification in Phoenix that monitoring is due. SCDHHS Quality
      Assurance will contact the State Worker or Provider Case Manager if monitoring becomes
      delinquent.

      Critical Incident Types:

      •      Abuse

      •      Neglect

      •      Exploitation

      •      Fall Resulting in Death

      •      Fall Resulting in Hospitalization

      •      Fall Resulting in Permanent Loss of Function

      •      Traumatic Injury Resulting in Death

      •      Traumatic Injury Resulting in Hospitalization

      •      Traumatic Injury Resulting in Permanent Loss of Function

      •      Unauthorized Physical/Chemical Restraint Resulting in Death

      •      Unauthorized Physical/Chemical Restraint Resulting in Hospitalization

      •      Unauthorized Physical/Chemical Restraint Resulting in Permanent Loss of Function

      •      Unexplained Death

      •      Elopement (24 hours or More)

      •      Media-Related Event Resulting in Harmful/Potentially Harmful Portrayal of
             SC DHHS and/or a Contracted Entity of SC DHHS

      •      Infectious-Disease Outbreak

      •      Pressure Ulcers That Are Unstageable or Staged III & IV (PRIME ONLY)

Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                  Page 36
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                  November 1, 2022

      •      Emergency Room Visit (HOME AGAIN ONLY)

      •      Death Following Break-Down in 24 Hour Back-Up System (HOME AGAIN ONLY)

      •      Involvement with Criminal Justice System (HOME AGAIN ONLY)

      •      Medication Administration Error (HOME AGAIN ONLY)




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                         Page 37
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 5 – Case Management Procedures                                              November 1, 2022


05.90       Process for Visits to Participants with Active Bedbug Infestation

        When bedbug infestation is suspected and an Enhanced Pest Control provider has scheduled
        but not made an initial visit to assess the home for bedbugs or when bedbug infestation has
        been confirmed by an Enhanced Pest Control provider but treatment has not been completed,
        and the Case Manager does not want to enter the home, the Case Manager must:

        •        Request permission from the Area Administrator or Lead Team to complete the
                 Quarterly Visit or Re-evaluation Visit outside the participant’s home.

        •        Receive approval or denial from the Area Administrator or Lead Team. The Area
                 Administrator or Lead Team must document the request and decision in the
                 narrative.

        •        Observe the participant directly while completing the visit on the front porch, or
                 deck of the participant’s home, ADHC (if participant attends ADHC), at the Area
                 Office or other public place.

        •        Use the EVV mobile application to check-in and check-out for the visit.

        •        Add comment in Service Plan, Home Assessment section and Narrative regarding
                 confirmed bedbug infestation and treatment.

        •        Make the next scheduled visit inside the participant’s home after the treatment has
                 been completed.

        •        If the participant is not eligible for the Enhanced Pest Control service or refuses
                 treatment, the Case Manager must consult with the Area Administrator for
                 guidance.




Chapter 5-Case Management                                                                      Page 38
