SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                                                         November 1, 2022

                                                             TABLE OF
                                                             CONTENTS

     09.10    Introduction................................................................................................................... 3

     09.20   CLTC PASRR Policy and Procedure ............................................................................ 5

             09.21       Referrals for PASRR ........................................................................................ 5

                       09.21.10          Appropriateness of Referrals for Level I Screening ........................ 6

                       09.21.11          Out-of-State Referrals ...................................................................... 7

             09.22       Confidentiality .................................................................................................. 8

             09.23       Applicant Involvement ..................................................................................... 8

             09.24      Consent .............................................................................................................. 8

             09.25      Timeliness Standard for Completion of Level I Screening ............................... 8

             09.26       Accurate PASRR Level I Completion .............................................................. 9

                       09.26.10 Appropriateness for Referrals to Level II Evaluation – Mental
                       Illness ................................................................................................................ 11

                       09.26.20 Appropriateness for Level II Evaluation -Intellectual Disability
                       (ID) ................................................................................................................... 15

                       09.26.30 Appropriateness for Level II Evaluation - Dual Diagnosis of MI/ID 17

             09.27       Level II Review .............................................................................................. 17

                       09.27.10 Processing Level II Psychiatric Evaluation Claims for Medicaid
                       Applicants. ........................................................................................................ 17

                       09.27.20 Processing Level II Psychiatric Evaluation Claims for Non-
                       Medicaid Applicants ......................................................................................... 18

                       09.27.30          Advanced Categorical Determination............................................ 19

                       09.27.31          Advanced Categorical Determination Group - Mental Illness ...... 20

                       09.27.32 Advanced Categorical Determination Group – Intellectual
                       Disability........................................................................................................... 21

                       09.27.40          Level II Determination Notification .............................................. 22
Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                                                                   Page 1
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                                        November 1, 2022

             09.28     Timeliness for Completion of Level II Determinations.................................. 22

     09.30    PASRR Completed by Other Entities ......................................................................... 23




Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                                               Page 2
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                         November 1, 2022

09.10    Introduction

     The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of 1987 provides for Pre- Admission
     Screening Resident Review (PASRR) requirements. The PASRR Program is designed to screen
     individuals prior to nursing home placement. Identified individuals who have a suspected
     serious mental illness or intellectual disability/ related disability are referred through the Level
     II process to determine the need for nursing facility services and specialized services or
     specialized rehabilitation services. Title XIX certified nursing facilities are prohibited from
     admitting any new resident who has a suspected serious mental illness (MI) or intellectual
     disability/ related disability, unless it has been determined the individual requires the level of
     services provided by the nursing facility and whether the individual needs specialized services
     or specialized rehabilitation services for mental illness or intellectual disability/ related
     disability.

     PASRR was created in 1987 through language in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act
     (OBRA) and has three goals:

     •      Identify individuals with mental illness (MI) and/or intellectual disability (ID) or
            related disability (RD). Previously termed mental retardation (MR)

     •      Ensure individuals are placed appropriately, whether in the community or in a nursing
            facility; and

    •       Ensure individuals receive the services required for Mental Illness or Intellectual
            Disability or related disability.

     Prior to admission, the CLTC reviewer or designee will initiate the Level I Screening to
     identify those individuals suspected of having mental illness or intellectual disability/ related
     disability. If the individual has or is suspected of having an intellectual disability/ related
     disability or a serious mental illness, the case will proceed through the Level II evaluation
     process.

     A signed Memorandum of Agreement with the Department of Health and Human Services
     allows hospitals and nursing facilities to complete the Level I Screening and portions of Level
     II Screening. The Level I Screening will be completed by nurses (RN or LPN) or social workers
     (to include social work designees or social services' workers).
     Nursing Facilities Responsibilities

    Nursing facilities are to comply with pre-admission screening mandates of PASRR without
    exception. Any instance of non-compliance should be reported to SCDHHS Nursing Facility
    Program Area. Failure to meet this requirement will result in recoupment action by the South
    Carolina Department of Health and Human Services.

    The nursing facility must initiate a new Level I/Level II screening and review for any resident
    when there is a significant change in the resident’s condition related to suspected serious mental
    illness or intellectual disability or related disability.
Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                               Page 3
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                       November 1, 2022


    The CLTC reviewer will provide medical and/ or technical assistance to the facility as
    requested. The State must ensure follow-up care for those individuals determined to be in need
    of specialized services through the PASRR process.

    Nursing Facilities are responsible for initiating a Level II PASRR process for any resident who
    has experienced a significant change related to a suspected serious mental illness or intellectual
    disability or related disability.

    These responsibilities include the following:
    •      Initiating treatment to meet immediate needs and begin the comprehensive
           assessments process.

    •      Completing Minimum Data Set (MDS) and Resident Assessment Protocols (RAPs) as
           required.

    •      Completing Care Plan revisions within seven (7) business days.

    •      Arranging for the completion of the PASRR Psychiatric Evaluation Level II if the
           resident is being referred due to a serious mental illness.

    •      Forwarding the Level II packet to the appropriate State Authority(ies) by the twenty-
           first (21st) day following discovery of a significant change. Refer to 09.26.10 and
           09.26.20 for a list of Level II packet forms.

    Note: The State Authority must complete the written determination within seven (7) business
           days.

    •      Reviewing the determination with the resident and/or responsible party and
           Interdisciplinary Team.

    •      Addressing recommendations in the care plan.

    PASRR Forms are available in the South Carolina Medicaid Nursing Facility Services Manual
    located at www.scdhhs.gov.




Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                             Page 4
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                     November 1, 2022

09.20   CLTC PASRR Policy and Procedure

   09.21   Referrals for PASRR

               All admissions to a Title XIX certified nursing facility require pre-admission screening
               regardless of pay source. A referral for this screening may originate from any
               knowledgeable source such as:

               • Applicant
               • Family member
               • Interested neighbor or friend
               • Physician
               • Hospital staff
               • Nursing home staff
               • Staff of a public or private agency
               • Medicare-Medicaid Plan

               Agencies that may make referrals include the Department of Social Services (DSS),
               Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC), Department of Mental
               Health (DMH), Department of Disabilities and Special Needs (DDSN), home health
               agencies, etc.

               A referral for nursing home pre-admission review must be referred to CLTC
               Centralized Intake or completed by participating nursing homes or hospitals.

               Level I Screens completed by nursing facilities or hospitals must be batched and
               forwarded to the CLTC Area Office for review. The reviewed/ signed Level I screen
               will not be returned to the admitting facility unless the CLTC reviewer determines
               changes are needed based on the review.

               Note: Designated CLTC staff keys the application, Participant Information, and Level
                     I determination and routes forms to the designated CLTC reviewer for review.
                     It is important for these screenings to be reviewed timely for completeness and
                     accuracy. Any problems should be resolved with the facility by contacting the
                     assessor for clarification or to request more information.

               Hospitals should be encouraged to begin discharge planning and screen individuals as
               soon as possible to facilitate the PASRR process and allow ample time for any
               subsequent evaluation needed.

               Nursing Facilities should confirm that PASRR Level I and Level II processes are
               complete prior to admitting the individual to the facility. In cases where the individual
               is admitted to the Nursing Facility without the appropriate screening, the Nursing
               Facility will be responsible for completing the required screening and for arranging any
               specialized services or specialized rehabilitative services deemed necessary.

    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                            Page 5
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                     November 1, 2022



               Centralized Intake Process:

        •      Receives referral for applicant requesting Pre-admission screening for nursing facility
               placement.

        •      Checks Phoenix for possible existing record.

        •      Screens the referral for appropriateness (Refer to Section 09.21.10.).

        •      Creates the appropriate application in Phoenix if there is no active PASRR or Pre-
               Admission Screening for Nursing Home Placement Application.

        •      Completes available Participant Information in Phoenix.

        •      Annotates in the Narrative, if referral is for PASRR only (non-Medicaid).

        •      Ensures a Nursing Home Placement Application is completed, if referral is for
               PASRR and Medicaid Level of Care Certification.

        •      Releases case to the CLTC Area Office.

               Designated Area Office Staff Process:

        •      Receives documents and assigns the case to a CLTC reviewer.

        •      Determines if a PASRR has been completed within one year of the referral.

        •      If a PASRR has been completed within one year of the referral, will confirm the
               previous PASRR is scanned into Phoenix Scans and will document in the participant’s
               narrative.

       09.21.10   Appropriateness of Referrals for Level I Screening

                  Level I Screening is necessary in the following circumstances:

                  1.     All new admissions to Title XIX certified nursing facilities regardless of pay
                         source.

                  2.     Prior to nursing home re-admission from a hospital for in- patient treatment
                         of a psychiatric condition, if the applicant has exceeded the ten (10) calendar
                         day bed hold.

                  3.     Out-of-state transfers.

    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                            Page 6
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                      November 1, 2022

                  4.     Respite care admissions to a nursing facility for up to fourteen (14) calendar
                         days or less; respite care admissions to a hospital are not subject to Level I
                         Screening.

                  Level I Screening is not necessary in the following circumstances:

                  1.     Inter-facility transfers (from one Title XIX nursing facility to another Title
                         XIX nursing facility) are not considered new admissions for purposes of
                         PASRR and are not subject to Level I Screening. The transferring nursing
                         facility is responsible for sending all PASRR information to the receiving
                         facility.

                        Note: If an individual is hospitalized for a non-psychiatric related condition
                               and enters a different nursing facility, a new PASRR is not necessary.
                               The transferring nursing facility may supply a copy.

                  2.     Admissions to facilities that are not certified for Medicaid participation.

                  3.     Intra-facility conversions from one pay source to another.

                  4.     Re-admission to Title XIX certified nursing facilities from a hospital,
                         including hospitalization for in-patient psychiatric care if within the ten (10)
                         day bed hold.

                  5.     Individuals admitted to a nursing facility from a hospital for acute in-patient
                         treatment of the same condition for which they were hospitalized where the
                         nursing facility stay is anticipated to be less than thirty (30) calendar days,
                         as certified in writing by a physician.

                  6.     Swing bed or Administrative Days admissions.

       09.21.11   Out-of-State Referrals

                  Individuals who are out-of-state and seeking admission to a South Carolina Title
                  XIX nursing facility are subject to the pre-admission screening requirements. South
                  Carolina will accept any state's Level I or Level II forms which include the necessary
                  information, or the transferring state may complete the South Carolina Level I and/or
                  Level II forms. CLTC must review and approve all out-of-state admissions. If the
                  Level II evaluation indicates specialized services are required, the appropriate South
                  Carolina State Authority must review the Level II packet and render a final
                  determination prior to admission to the nursing facility. Nursing facilities must not
                  admit any out-of-state individual who has not been appropriately screened prior to
                  admission according to South Carolina PASRR policies.

                  CLTC reviewer:

    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                             Page 7
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                       November 1, 2022

                  •       Receives referring state's PASRR information and scans the information into
                          Phoenix Scans.

                  •       Reviews thoroughness of information and inclusion of South Carolina
                          requirements.

                  •       Makes a recommendation regarding the need for further evaluation.

                  •       If the CLTC reviewer’s recommendation differs from the
                          recommendation indicated by the reviewer, mails a copy of the
                          corrected Level I screening to the admitting nursing facility.

                  •       Initials and dates the Level I form.

                  •      Routes the completed Level I form to the designated CLTC worker for
                         scanning.
   09.22    Confidentiality

           As with all applicants, confidentiality is important. Due to the nature and type of information
           obtained and shared, confidentiality must be safeguarded for all applicants regardless of pay
           source.

   09.23    Applicant Involvement

           The assessor must attempt to involve the applicant as much as possible in the actual screening
           process. If the applicant is enrolled in CLTC waiver, Level I Screening may be completed
           by a CLTC reviewer by telephone.

           Completion of the PASRR may include conferring with the applicant’s physician or other
           professionals caring for the applicant. When an applicant is physically or mentally unable
           to participate in the interview, the legal guardian, Authorized Representative, and/or
           permitted caregiver may be interviewed for completion of the screening.

   09.24   Consent

           CLTC Consent Form 121 is required following current CLTC Policy and Procedure.
           Hospitals and nursing facilities that conduct PASRR Level I Screenings on non-Medicaid
           applicants are not required to obtain an informed consent.

           A CLTC Consent Form 121 is required in order to share information with any agency or
           person other than the entity which completed the form.

   09.25   Timeliness Standard for Completion of Level I Screening

           CLTC's intent is to facilitate nursing home admission for all applicants regardless of pay
    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                              Page 8
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                     November 1, 2022

           source. Attempts must be made to complete the Level I Screening and to communicate the
           findings as quickly as possible to the appropriate parties. The Level I Screening Form will
           be completed within ten (10) business days of assignment to a CLTC reviewer or referral
           to an entity designated to complete the screening. Cases must be prioritized according to the
           individual needs of applicants. Hospitalized applicants should be screened as soon as
           possible following referral. Any delay in the PASRR process should be reported to the Lead
           Team Nurse Consultant or the Area Administrator and referral source and documented
           in the Narrative in Phoenix.

   09.26       Accurate PASRR Level I Completion

           The Level I Screening Form, must be completed accurately and appropriately by telephone
           or visit using all available information. When the screening is completed by the CLTC
           reviewer, the Phoenix version of the PASRR will be used. When the screening is completed
           by a nurse or social worker (or social services designee) outside of SCDHHS, the Level I
           Screening Form, SCDHHS Form 234, will be used. The assessor will first attempt to obtain
           the information from the applicant or Authorized Representative. However, information
           may also be obtained from the physician or other permitted caregiver supports. The assessor
           should consider the validity of the information received.

           A team conference is required to review the information and render a joint recommendation.
           The form must be signed and dated by the assessor and by the reviewer if completed by
           CLTC. The SCDHHS Form 234 must be signed by the assessor and initialed and dated by
           the CLTC reviewer if completed by another entity. For pre-admission screening purposes,
           Level I Screenings are valid for one year, unless there are significant changes in the
           applicant's condition which warrants a new Level I Screening. The Level I can be
           updated by the assessor or designee within a one-year period to verify the continued
           appropriateness of the screening. Any information added to the Level I as an update shall
           be entered in the corresponding comments section. Any comments added as an update must
           be initialed and dated. If significant changes have occurred, a new Level I must be
           completed.

           The assigned CLTC reviewer:

           •        Receives assignment for PASRR screening.

           •        Contacts applicant and/or Authorized Representative for completion of Level I
                    Screening.

           •        Obtains the CLTC Consent Form in Phoenix. Consent must be obtained from the
                    Authorized Representative if applicant requests or is unable to sign.

           •        Completes Level I Screening following PASRR User's Guide instructions.

           •        Enters information into PASRR Sections of Phoenix.

    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                            Page 9
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                        November 1, 2022

          •       Signs and dates the assessor fields in Phoenix.

          •       Consults with a second CLTC reviewer and makes a team decision regarding the
                  need for further evaluation. The reviewer signs and dates the reviewer fields.

          •       Updates other sections of Phoenix as appropriate.

          The recommendation regarding the need for further evaluation is based on the professional
          judgment of the CLTC reviewer team. The CLTC reviewer is responsible for ensuring
          the Level I Screening Form is properly completed prior to making a recommendation. Input
          from the Lead Team Nurse Consultant, Area Administrator and/or Central Office Staff
          may be needed if the team is unable to reach a consensus. Applicants should not be
          admitted to a nursing facility if indicators of serious Mental Illness or Intellectual Disability/
          Related Disability are identified, until the CLTC reviewer team completes the team review.

          •       If the recommendation is for “No Further Evaluation”, the assigned CLTC
                  reviewer

                  o       Checks the appropriate field in the Level I Screen

                  o       Signs and dates as the assessor

                  o       Team staffs the recommendation with another CLTC reviewer

                  o       The reviewer signs and dates in the Reviewer section.

          •       If “Indicators are present, but no further evaluation is recommended,” the
                  assigned CLTC reviewer

                  o       Checks the appropriate field in the Level I Screen

                  o       Provides justification for the recommendation in the comment section

                  o       Signs and dates as the assessor

                  o       Team staffs the recommendation with another CLTC reviewer

                  o       The reviewer signs and dates in the reviewer section.

          •       Keys PASRR information into Phoenix as appropriate.

          •       Sends a copy of Level I Screening Form to the nursing facility if applicant has
                  finalized plans for specific nursing facility placement.

          •       The date sent and to whom must be keyed under the PASSR tab labeled “Facility”
                  in Phoenix when the form is routed for mailing.

    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                                Page 10
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                      November 1, 2022

       09.26.10   Appropriateness for Referrals to Level II Evaluation – Mental Illness

                  The federal definition of Mental Illness for PASRR is best understood in terms of
                  the four “D’s”:

                  •      A diagnosis or suspicion of a major mental illness such as schizophrenia,
                         bipolar disorder, major depression, or an anxiety disorder.

                  •      An absence of dementia. If dementia is also present (co-morbid with)
                         Mental Illness, dementia is not the primary diagnosis. The individual’s
                         Mental Illness must be more serious than dementia.

                  •      A well-defined duration. To be relevant, intensive psychiatric treatment for
                         Mental Illness must have taken place within the last two (2) years.

                  •      A particular level of disability. The individual’s Mental Illness must have
                         resulted in functional limitations in major life activities within the past 3 to 6
                         months. The individual need not have received treatment. The severity of
                         the impairment and how recently it occurred are important, not whether the
                         individual was hospitalized or was seen by a mental health professional.

                  If the CLTC reviewer team’s decision is “Recommend further evaluation based
                  on mental illness indicators,” the assigned CLTC reviewer completes the
                  following activities:

                  •      Explains rationale for basis of the recommendation in the comment section.

                  •      Completes the corresponding PASRR sections in Phoenix.

                  •      Creates an electronic referral to Centralized Intake for a nursing home
                         placement application if the original referral was for non-Medicaid PASRR.
                         This will enable the CLTC reviewer to complete the required Phoenix
                         Assessment.

                  •      Once the application is released to the CLTC Area Office and assigned to
                         the CLTC reviewer, completes an assessment in Phoenix.

                  •      If the applicant does not meet level of care and has a primary pay source
                         other than Medicaid, the process can continue.

                  •      Obtains or completes the Mental Illness Social History.

                  •      Obtains copies of the applicant’s most recent history and physical, pertinent
                         medical records and/or treatment plans.

                  •      Arranges for a physician, not affiliated with South Carolina Department of
    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                              Page 11
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                    November 1, 2022

                        Mental Health, to complete the PASRR Psychiatric Evaluation Level II,
                        SCDHHS Form 250. (For directions for form use and billing instructions,
                        refer to section 09.27.)

                 •      Keys PASRR information in the applicant’s narrative and PASRR tab in
                        Phoenix as the evaluation proceeds.

                 •      Prepares and mails, faxes or hand-delivers the review packet to the South
                        Carolina Department of Mental Health following receipt of the completed
                        PASRR Psychiatric Evaluation Level II, SCDHHS from 250.

                 •      The packet includes:

                        o      PASRR Cover Letter
                        o      Copies of the Level I Screening
                        o      Mini Mental State Exam (if applicable)
                        o      CLTC Consent Form 121
                        o      Assessment
                        o      Applicant’s current history and physical
                        o      Mental Illness Social History
                        o      PASRR Psychiatric Evaluation Level II, SCDHHS Form 250
                        o      Other pertinent copies of the medical record

                        Note: All documents not created in Phoenix must be scanned into
                              Phoenix Scans under the appropriate scan tags.

                 •      If the final determination is not received from the State Authority within five
                        (5) business days, the CLTC reviewer contacts South Carolina Department
                        of Mental Health to determine the status of the evaluation and documents the
                        contact in the applicant’s narrative.

                 •      If no response is received within seven (7) business days, the CLTC
                        reviewer notifies the Central Office Designee, Lead Team Nurse and/or
                        Area Administrator of the delay.

                 •      Receives South Carolina Department of Mental Health Final Determination
                        and sends the PASRR Level I Screening Form, Mini Mental State Exam (if
                        applicable), Psychiatric Evaluation Level II Form, Final determination from
                        South Carolina Department of Mental Health and PASRR Notification Form
                        to the applicant and/or Authorized Representative AND the admitting
                        nursing facility.

                 •      Keys PASRR data in Phoenix under the corresponding PASRR tabs. The date
                        the final determination is signed by the State Authority or the date of the
                        verbal notification by the State Authority will be used for the determination
                        date.

    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                           Page 12
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                    November 1, 2022

                 •      If specialized services are recommended which cannot be provided in the
                        nursing facility, the CLTC reviewer sends a copy of the final determination
                        form to the Central Office Designee.

                  A PASRR Level II evaluation is not required for all applicants exhibiting behavioral
                  or adaptation problems. Only applicants who have or are suspected to have a serious
                  mental illness must be referred to Level II.

                  A serious mental illness is defined in terms of diagnosis, behavior, and recent
                  treatment history. These four (4) components are identified below.

                        I.      Diagnosis: (confirmed or suspected)

                                •      Schizophrenia

                                •      Bi-polar disorder
                                •      Severe mood/panic/anxiety disorder
                                •      Severe depression
                                •      Other psychotic disorder
                                •      Personality disorder
                                •      Somatoform disorder
                                •      Other mental disorder that may lead to a chronic disability

                                                       AND

                        II.      Impairment:

                                Level of impairment - The disorder has resulted in functional
                                limitations in major life activities within the past 3 to 6 months. An
                                individual typically has at least one of the following characteristics
                                on a continuing or intermittent basis:

                                a.    Interpersonal functioning - The individual has serious
                                      difficulty interacting appropriately and communicating
                                      effectively with other persons, has a possible history of
                                      altercations, evictions, firing, fear of strangers, avoidance of
                                      interpersonal relationships and social isolation.

                                b.    Concentration, persistence, and pace - The individual has
                                      serious difficulty in sustaining focused attention to permit the
                                      completion of tasks commonly found in work settings or in
                                      work-like structured activities, such as, in school or home
                                      settings; manifests difficulties in concentration; unable to
                                      complete simple tasks within an established time period,
                                      makes frequent errors, or requires assistance in the completion
                                      of these tasks.

    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                           Page 13
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                   November 1, 2022

                               c.    Adaptation to change - The individual has serious difficulty
                                     adapting to typical changes in circumstances associated with
                                     work, school, family, or social interaction; manifests agitation,
                                     exacerbated signs and symptoms associated with the illness, or
                                     withdrawal from the situation; or requires intervention by the
                                     mental health or judicial system.

                                                      OR
                        III.   Treatment:

                               Recent Treatment - The treatment history indicates that the individual
                               has experienced at least one of the following:

                               •     Psychiatric treatment more intensive than outpatient care and
                                     more than once in the past 2 years (e.g., partial hospitalization
                                     or inpatient hospitalization).

                                                       OR

                               •     Within the last 2 years, due to mental disorder, experienced an
                                     episode of significant disruption to the normal living situation,
                                     for which supportive services were required to maintain
                                     functioning at home, or in a residential treatment environment,
                                     or which resulted in intervention by housing or law
                                     enforcement officials.
                                                     BUT
                         IV    Dementia:

                               Not a primary diagnosis of dementia, including Alzheimer's disease
                               or a related disorder, or a non-primary diagnosis of dementia unless
                               the primary diagnosis is a serious mental illness. Dementia must be
                               confirmed by the completion of Mini- Mental State Exam, if this is
                               the basis for the recommendation for no further evaluation.

                               Note: The Mini-Mental State Exam is a copyrighted form. A blank
                                     form may not be copied. These forms must be ordered through
                                     CLTC Central Office. Once the form is completed with
                                     participant information, the form may be copied for participant
                                     record purposes.

                               Applicants who have attempted suicide within the past 2 years or
                               who are considered a danger to self or others, must be referred
                               for Level II evaluation, even if all above criteria are not met. The
                               appropriate recommendation should be checked on the Level I
                               Screening and the Comment Section should be utilized to explain
                               the basis for the recommendation.
    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                          Page 14
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                     November 1, 2022


                                 All medications will be reviewed for psychotropic/ psychoactive drugs
                                 to determine whether they are prescribed for control of physical non-
                                 psychiatric conditions, a minor mental illness, or a serious mental
                                 illness. If the applicant is maintained on a psychotropic/psychoactive
                                 drug with no significant impairment, referral to Level II is not
                                 required.

                                 Any applicant seeking discharge from an Institute of Mental Disease
                                 (IMD) must be evaluated through the Level II process prior to
                                 admission to a Title XIX nursing facility. The Level I and Level II
                                 Screenings will be completed per agreement with the South Carolina
                                 Department of Mental Health facility. Since the Institute of Mental
                                 Disease is part of the State Mental Health Authority, a physician or
                                 psychiatrist independent of the determining authority, must complete
                                 the psychiatric evaluation concerning placement options and
                                 specialized service needs. Final determinations regarding the need for
                                 continued specialized services must be made by the appropriate State
                                 Authority.

                                 Note: All corresponding Level II MI tabs under the PASRR
                                       section in Phoenix must be completed.

       09.26.20   Appropriateness for Level II Evaluation -Intellectual Disability (ID)

                  The presence of an Intellectual Disability (ID) or diagnosis of a related disability
                  requires Level II review. To qualify as having Intellectual Disability (ID) for the
                  purposes of PASRR, an individual must have significantly sub-average general
                  intellectual functioning. This is defined as an IQ score of less than seventy (70), as
                  measured by a standardized, reliable test of intellectual functioning. An individual
                  must also have concurrent impairments in adaptive functioning, manifested during
                  the developmental period. These impairments must have emerged prior to the age
                  eighteen (18) and must be likely to persist throughout the person’s life. Intellectual
                  Disability (ID) encompasses a wide range of conditions and levels of impairment.

                  Related disabilities include severe, chronic disabilities that are not an intellectual
                  disability, which occurred before age twenty-two (22) and are expected to continue
                  indefinitely. These conditions often produce similar functional impairments and/ or
                  adaptive behavior and require similar treatment or services as intellectual
                  disabilities. Some examples of related disabilities may include Down’s syndrome,
                  fetal alcohol syndrome, cerebral palsy, seizure disorder, autism, traumatic brain
                  injury, etc. Related disabilities must result in substantial functional imitations in
                  three (3) or more of the following major life activities:

                  •      Self-care
                  •      The Understanding and Use of language Learning
                  •      Mobility
    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                            Page 15
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                    November 1, 2022

                 •      Self-direction
                 •      Capacity for independent living

                 Any applicant seeking discharge from a SCDDSN facility must be reviewed by
                 CLTC through the Level II process prior to admission to a Title XIX nursing facility.

                 Note: If a resident with a diagnosis of ID/RD has exceeded the 10 day bed hold
                       a new Level II is required. If the Level II PASRR has been completed in
                       the past year, it may be updated in the comment section.

                 If the CLTC reviewer team’s decision is “Recommend further evaluation based
                 on Intellectual Disability” the assigned CLTC reviewer completes the following
                 activities:

                 •      Explains rationale for basis of recommendation in the comment section.

                 •      Completes the corresponding PASRR sections in Phoenix.

                 •      Creates an electronic referral to Centralized Intake for a nursing home
                        placement application if the original referral was for Non-Medicaid PASRR.
                        This will enable the CLTC reviewer to complete the required Phoenix
                        Assessment.

                 •      Once the application is released the CLTC Area Office and assigned to the
                        CLTC reviewer, completes an assessment in Phoenix.

                 •      If the applicant does not meet level of care and has a primary pay source other
                        than Medicaid, the process can continue.

                 •      Obtains or completes the Intellectual Disability Social History.

                 •      Obtains copies of the applicant’s most recent history and physical, pertinent
                        medical records and/or treatment plans.

                 •      Keys PASRR information in the applicant’s narrative and PASRR tab
                        in Phoenix as the evaluation proceeds.

                 •      Prepares and mails, faxes or hand-delivers the review packet to the South
                        Carolina Department of Disabilities and Special Needs.

                 •      The packet includes:

                        o       PASARR Cover Letter
                        o       Copy of the Level I Screening
                        o       CLTC Consent Form 121
                        o       Assessment
                        o       Applicant’s current history and physical
    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                            Page 16
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                       November 1, 2022

                          o      Intellectual Disability Social History
                          o      Other pertinent copies of medical record

                          Note: All documents not created in Phoenix must be scanned into Phoenix
                                 scans under the appropriate scan tags.

                  •       If the final determination is not received from the State Authority within five
                          (5) business days, the CLTC reviewer contacts the South Carolina
                          Department of Disability and Special Needs to determine the status of the
                          evaluation and documents the contact in the applicant’s narrative.

                  •       If no response is received within seven (7) business days, the CLTC
                          reviewer notifies the Central Office Designee, Lead Team Nurse and/or
                          Area Administrator of the delay.

                  •       Receives the South Carolina Department of Disabilities and Special Needs
                          Final Determination and sends PASRR Level I Screening Form, Mini-Mental
                          State Exam if applicable, Level II Form, Final Determination from
                          Department of Disabilities and Special Needs and PASRR Notification
                          Form.

                  •       Keys PASRR data in Phoenix under the corresponding PASRR tabs. The
                          date the final determination is signed by the State Authority or the date of the
                          verbal notification by the State Authority will be used for the determination
                          date.

                  •       If specialized services are recommended which cannot be provided in the
                          nursing facility, the CLTC reviewer sends a copy of the final determination
                          form to the Central Office Designee.

                  Note: All corresponding, Level II ID tabs under the PASRR section in Phoenix
                        must be completed.

       09.26.30 Appropriateness for Level II Evaluation - Dual Diagnosis of MI/ID

                  For applicants diagnosed with both intellectual disability and serious mental illness
                  (dually diagnosed) both State Authorities must conduct a Level II review.


   09.27    Level II Review

           Based on the Level I review, an applicant suspected of having a serious mental illness or
           intellectual disability must be referred for Level II evaluation.

           09.27.10 Processing Level II Psychiatric Evaluation Claims for Medicaid Applicants.


    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                              Page 17
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                    November 1, 2022

                  The assigned CLTC reviewer:

                  •     Completes the PASRR Psychiatric Evaluation Request for Medicaid
                        applicants, obtains the Area Administrator’s signature and mails form to
                        the physician along with the Level II Psychiatric Evaluation Form, SCDHHS
                        Form 250.

                  •     Receives the completed Psychiatric Evaluation and prepares the Level II
                        packet.

                  •     Physician bills directly using Health Insurance 1500 Claim Form.

                       Note: If the Health Insurance 1500 Claim Form is received in the CLTC Area
                             Office, the CLTC reviewer forwards it to:

                             Medicaid Claims Receipt
                             P. O. Box 1412
                             Columbia, SC 29202

       09.27.20   Processing Level II Psychiatric Evaluation Claims for Non- Medicaid
                  Applicants

                  The assigned CLTC reviewer:

                  •     Completes the PASRR Psychiatric Evaluation Request for Non- Medicaid
                        Applicants, obtains the Area Administrator’s signature and mails form to
                        the physician along with the Level II Psychiatric Evaluation Form, SCDHHS
                        Form 250.

                  •     Receives completed forms from physician. Scans the Level II Psychiatric
                        Evaluation Form, SCDHHS Form 250, into Phoenix and adds the form to the
                        Level II evaluation packet.

                  •     Routes the PASRR Psychiatric Evaluation Request for Non- Medicaid
                        Applicants to Support Staff.

                  The designated Support Staff:

                  •     Determines whether or not the physician has completed the PASRR
                        Psychiatric Evaluation Request for Non- Medicaid correctly.

                  •     If name of the physician completing the form is not identical to the signature,
                        contacts physician’s office to obtain correct name or practice name.

                  •     Verifies physician's name/ Practice name has a corresponding social security
                        number or Federal ID number listed. Example: Dr. Solo Practice/247-09-
    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                           Page 18
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                       November 1, 2022

                         5555 or The Solo Practice Group/51-98765.

                  •      If the PASRR Psychiatric Evaluation Request for Non-Medicaid Applicants
                         is complete, forwards the form to Central Office for processing and scans
                         the form into Phoenix.

                  •      If the PASRR Psychiatric Evaluation Request for Non-Medicaid Applicants
                         is incomplete, confers with CLTC reviewer and calls physician's office to
                         clarify/correct the information. Makes corrections and forwards to Central
                         Office for processing.

                  •      Forwards claim to Fiscal Affairs for processing.

                  Once Level II forms are completed, the appropriate State Authority must review all
                  available information and make a final determination as to the need for specialized
                  services. The Level II process of PASRR consists of a comprehensive review of the
                  applicant's need for nursing home care and specialized services for a serious mental
                  illness or intellectual disability. This determination of specialized services needs
                  must be made by the appropriate State Authority. Level I and Level II determinations
                  are valid for one year unless there is a significant change in the applicant's condition.
                  Level II final determination forms from the state authority cannot be updated. A new
                  complete Level I and Level II form must be completed if there are significant
                  changes.

                  A significant change has the following characteristics:
                  •      A major change
                  •      Not self-limiting change (a disease process that resolves spontaneously with
                         or without specific treatment)
                  •      Impacts more than one area of the individual’s health status; and
                  •      Requires interdisciplinary review or revision of the care plan

                  Any individual determined to have a serious mental illness or intellectual disability
                  through the Level II evaluation process, who is in need of specialized services but
                  not in need of nursing home services, shall be considered inappropriate for
                  placement or continued residence in a Medicaid-certified nursing facility. However,
                  it is the responsibility of the appropriate state authority to provide or arrange for
                  specialized services when it is required. The only exception to this would involve an
                  applicant determined in need of specialized services who has resided in the facility
                  for at least thirty (30) months.

       09.27.30   Advanced Categorical Determination

                  The assigned CLTC reviewer completes the following activities:

                  •      Reviews case and determines need for Advanced Categorical Determination.

    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                               Page 19
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                      November 1, 2022

                 •      Completes Assessment by telephone or visit

                 •      Explains rationale for basis of decision in Comment Section.

                 •      Obtains any documentation to support decision; i.e., physician’s progress
                        notes, nursing home orders, etc.

                 •      Checks Advanced Categorical Determination recommendation in Phoenix

                 •      Enters PASRR data Phoenix

                 •      Routes PASRR Notification Form and PASRR Level I Screening to the
                        applicant and/or Authorized Representative and admitting facility.

                 09.27.31    Advanced Categorical Determination Group - Mental Illness

                 Certain individuals who require nursing facility care may meet criteria which will
                 allow the CLTC reviewer to classify the individual for an advanced decision that
                 specialized services or special rehabilitation services are not required. Because this
                 is a Level II process, through an agreement with the State Authority, an Assessment,
                 must be completed. Only the CLTC reviewer may apply these criteria. The
                 circumstances in which these classifications are allowed are as follows:

                 1.     The individual could not participate in or benefit from specialized services
                        due to a comatose or semi-comatose state or functioning at brain stem level,
                        as documented in the medical record.

                 2.     The individual has an illness which results in a level of physical impairment
                        so severe that the individual could not be expected to benefit from specialized
                        services. In such cases, the individual’s need for medical care overrides the
                        need for specialized services.

                 3.     The individual is being admitted to the nursing facility on a provisional basis
                        for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) calendar days to provide respite for
                        in-home caregivers.

                 4.     The individual is being admitted to the nursing facility on a provisional basis
                        not to exceed seven (7) calendar days while alternative arrangements can be
                        made. The admission must be at the request of the South Carolina
                        Department of Social Services, Division of Protective Services, due to
                        suspicion of abuse or neglect on an emergency basis.

                 5.     The individual is being admitted directly to the nursing facility from acute
                        inpatient care for a period not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days, as certified
                        by the attending physician. The admission must be for treatment of the same
                        condition that necessitated the hospitalization and must not be due to a
    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                             Page 20
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                     November 1, 2022

                        psychiatric condition. If the individual’s stay at the nursing home exceeds
                        thirty (30) calendar days, the Level II process MUST be completed by the
                        fortieth (40th) calendar day. It is the CLTC reviewer's responsibility to
                        monitor all assigned cases for Advanced Determinations.

                        It is the CLTC reviewer's responsibility to monitor the time frame of
                        a case for Advanced Determination.

                 09.27.32 Advanced Categorical Determination Group – Intellectual
                 Disability

                 Certain individuals who require nursing facility care may meet criteria which will
                 allow the CLTC reviewer to classify the individual for an advance decision that
                 specialized services are not required. Because this is a Level II process through an
                 agreement with the State Authority, both a medical assessment using the Form 1718
                 and the social history assessment under PASRR, must be completed. Only the CLTC
                 reviewer may apply these criteria. The circumstances in which these classifications
                 are allowed are as follows:

                 1.     The individual has a diagnosis of dementia in combination with an
                        intellectual disability or related disability. In these cases, the dementia
                        diagnosis must be substantiated by a Mini-Mental State Examination.

                 2.     The individual is being admitted to the nursing facility on a provisional basis
                        for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) calendar days to provide respite for
                        in-home caregivers.

                 3.     The individual is being admitted to the nursing facility on a provisional basis
                        not to exceed seven (7) calendar days while alternative arrangements can be
                        made. The admission must be at the request of the South Carolina
                        Department of Social Services, due to suspicion of abuse or neglect on an
                        emergency basis.

                 4.     The individual is being admitted directly to the nursing facility from an acute
                        in-patient setting for a period not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days, as
                        certified by the attending physician. The admission must be for treatment of
                        the same condition that necessitated the hospitalization and may not be due to
                        a psychiatric condition. If the applicant's stay at the nursing facility exceeds
                        thirty (30) calendar days, the Level II must be completed by the fortieth
                        (40th) calendar day.

                        It is the CLTC reviewer's responsibility to monitor the time frames of a case
                        for Advanced Determination.



    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                            Page 21
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                    November 1, 2022

       09.27.40    Level II Determination Notification

                  Upon receipt of a final determination from the State Authority, the CLTC
                  reviewer team should review the summary and recommendations. Notification of
                  the Level II determination is required and is communicated via the PASRR
                  Notification Form. Because Advanced Categorical Determinations are Level II
                  determinations, written notice is also required. A copy of the evaluation and final
                  determination report(s) must be sent to the applicant and/or Authorized
                  Representative and admitting nursing facility. All corresponding MI or ID Final
                  tabs must be completed in Phoenix.

   09.28   Timeliness for Completion of Level II Determinations

           The state authority must make the Level II determination within seven (7) business days of
           referral. This report may be communicated by telephone or fax with written follow-up by
           mail. If no response is received within seven (7) business days, the CLTC reviewer notifies
           the Central Office Designee, Lead Team Nurse and/or Area Administrator of the delay.




    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                           Page 22
SCDHHS
Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
Chapter 9 – PASRR Procedures                                                  November 1, 2022


   09.30    PASRR Completed by Other Entities

           Any PASRR completed by other entities (hospitals and nursing homes) via a Memorandum
           of Agreement must be batched weekly and sent to the Area Office for review by the CLTC
           reviewer. The CLTC reviewer will review the PASRR and initial if the PASRR is
           determined to be accurate, complete, and appropriate. The approved PASRR will be scanned
           into Phoenix and placed under the PASRR scan tag.

           For applicants who have an existing Phoenix record (active or terminated), no other
           information is required to be recorded in Phoenix.

           For applicants who do not have an existing Phoenix record, a new Participant Record must
           be created.

           A PASRR application is not required for PASRR reviews.

           The PASRR section in Phoenix which includes the recommendation and reviewer’s signature
           is not required for a PASRR review.

           If the PASRR completed via MOA is not accurate, complete or appropriate, the PASRR
           must be returned for correction.




    Chapter 9-PASARR                                                                        Page 23
