  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                                                                  November 1, 2022




                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

10.10   Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 2

10.20    Termination and Transfer Policy and Procedure ................................................................ 3

        10.21       Termination ............................................................................................................. 3

                  10.21.10          Transition to/from Other Waiver ........................................................... 8

        10.22       Transfer of Waiver Participant to Other CLTC Region.......................................... 9

        10.23         Applications involving more than one CLTC Area Office:................................ 10




Chapter 10-Termination                                                                                                              Page 1
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                              November 1, 2022

10.10 Introduction

      This Chapter includes policy and procedure for case/application termination and case
      transfer. Case termination involves all activities associated with closing a CLTC case when
      an applicant/participant exits the program for a specified reason.

      Termination of a case is not to be confused with termination of waiver services or
      termination of one application when more than one application is open. (See Chapter 7.25
      Termination of Waiver Services.)

      Individuals may have more than one CLTC program application open at the same time if
      the situation requires and the appropriate criteria are met. It is important for CLTC workers
      to verify both program application and overall status in Phoenix prior to initiating and
      ending case actions.




Chapter 10-Termination                                                                     Page 2
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                                  November 1, 2022

10.20    Termination and Transfer Policy and Procedure

      10.21       Termination

              An applicant/participant should be terminated for any of the following reasons on
              the date of action, unless otherwise specified:

              •        Aged out of the program

              •        Certified and Closed
                       Individual is living in the community, has been determined to meet level of
                       care criteria, and is seeking placement in a Medicaid-sponsored long-term
                       care facility.

              •        Certified and Closed-Bed Available
                       Applicant is seen in the community, and states that NH bed is available.

              •        Declined participation
                       Individual declines to participate by signing Service Choice or stating
                       verbally does not want any continued involvement with CLTC. Narrative
                       must include documentation of the contact and reason for the termination.

              •        Did not relocate to South Carolina
                       Out-of-state applicant who does not relocate to the state within 60 days (see
                       Chapter 8 Section 08.22.11).

              •        Died
                       The date of closure must be the date of death. In Phoenix, this will be a global
                       termination, closing all applications. Narrative entries must be completed
                       prior to closure. Services must be terminated with an effective date no later
                       than the date of death.

                       Note: In the event of a termination due to death, the CLTC Notification Form 171
                       will not be sent to the Authorized Representative or other permitted caregiver.


                       Payments are not made for any administrative work completed after
                       closure. Central Office will not issue case managers payment by
                       adjustment. For example, if a participant dies in March and the case
                       management provider finds out in April, the case management provider
                       is only paid for the March contact and must date the closure as the date
                       of death.

              •        Eligibility Denied
                        Medicaid Eligibility determines enrolled waiver participant did not return
                        required information.

              •        Enrolled in another Program
Chapter 10-Termination                                                                          Page 3
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                                November 1, 2022


             •       Entered Administrative Days
                      Individual is Certified for Administrative Days coverage in an acute care
                      hospital.
             •       Entered DMH/DDSN Program
                      Entered a Department of Mental Health/Department of Disabilities and
                      Special Needs facility. Follow up should be made to the licensed facility to
                      determine if the admission to the program is to be short or long term prior
                      to terminating. (See Section 05.40)

             •       Entered HASCI Waiver
                      Entered Head and Spinal Cord Injuries Waiver administered by DDSN

             •       Entered HMO
                      Entered Health Maintenance Organization.

             •       Entered ID/RD Waiver
                      Entered Intellectual Disabilities/Related Disabilities Waiver administered
                      by DDSN.

             •       Entered Nursing Home
                      Medicaid-sponsored nursing home placement only, including conversion to
                      Medicaid-sponsored nursing home. For waiver participants/applicants, the
                      date of closure must be the date the individual entered the nursing home
                      under Medicaid sponsorship.

             •       Entered Nursing Home Private Pay

             •       Entered PACE (Program For All Inclusive Care for the Elderly)
                      Only to be used by designated CLTC offices.

             •       Entered RCF
                     Admitted to Community Residential Care Facility under a payment source
                     other than Optional State Supplement.

             •       Financial Application not Completed

             •       Financially Ineligible
                      Participant does not meet financial guidelines for Medicaid-sponsored long
                      term care services. Notification or verification must be available before a
                      participant is terminated. If a participant requires services in the community,
                      referrals should be made for the participant to other community agencies.
                      Using the date of financial ineligibility as determined by County Medicaid
                      Eligibility, the case must be closed the last day of eligibility. For example, if
                      ineligible 9-1-14, the closure date must be 8-31-14. If it is learned that
                      financial eligibility will be reinstated within 7 days of the closure, it should
                      be reported in Phoenix as a problem to have the case reopened. If the
                      eligibility is reestablished, the RSP must be reentered.
Chapter 10-Termination                                                                        Page 4
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                               November 1, 2022


             •       Full Calendar Month Closure
                      Waiver participant who has met the full calendar month criteria, which is
                      defined as from the first calendar day of the month throughout the last
                      calendar of the month. If the participant remains hospitalized or
                      institutionalized for a full calendar month, the case must be closed to the
                      waiver effective no later than the last day of the full calendar month period.
                      (See Section 05.40)

             •       Home Again Waiver

             •       Inappropriate after Intake
                      Individual was referred for a program without being informed or was
                      referred for a program in error. This termination reason should not be used
                      when the applicant is declining participation, did not meet intake criteria or
                      is financially or medically ineligible for a program.

             •       Intake Criteria not met
                      Intake criteria not met for program application.

             •       Medically Ineligible
                     Individual does not meet level of care criteria for Medicaid-sponsored long
                     term care services. Medically Ineligible Policy (see Section 03.22) must be
                     followed prior to terminating the individual as medically ineligible.

             Note: Any waiver or children’s services participant who is determined to be
                   medically ineligible must receive a ten (10) business day notice prior to
                   termination of the case. Services can continue through the date of
                   termination. If appealed within ten (10) business days, the application/case
                   may remain open if requested by the participant and/or Authorized
                   Representative. The participant and provider must be notified of this
                   determination through the CLTC Notification Form 171 and the date of
                   termination, ten (10) business days from notification, must be indicated on
                   the form. Once the ten (10) business days period has expired, the
                   application/case must be closed in Phoenix and termination policies and
                   procedures followed.
             •       Merged Case

             •       Moved out of State (Community)

             •       Moved out of State (Institution)

             •       No Response From Participant
                     This is used to close out applications that have not yet been enrolled and to
                     close out initial status applications where contact has not been made.

             •       Participant Incarcerated
Chapter 10-Termination                                                                      Page 5
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                             November 1, 2022

                     Incarcerated waiver participant must be terminated by the last day of the
                     month of incarceration.

             •       Participant is Non-Compliant
                     Participant closed due to non-compliance. (Refer to Section 05.40.30)
             •       PASRR Completed

             •       Referred to HASCI

             •       DDSN is the agency designated for Head and Spinal Cord Injury
                     (HASCI) waiver. CLTC Nurse Consultants are responsible for the
                     initial pre- admission screening and nursing facility level of care
                     determination. If the individual meets the level of care criteria for
                     nursing home, terminates as Referred HASCI Waiver TEFRA
                     Entered Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1987 program (also
                     known as “Katie Beckett”), a special Medicaid category for disabled
                     children living at home who are not otherwise Medicaid eligible due to
                     family income.

             •       Tentative LOC > 30 days
             •       LOC has been pending for more than 30 days with no imminent
                     discharge or requested documentation not received. (Refer to Section
                     03.23) Terminated to Medicare
                     Admission to a nursing home with Medicare as the payment source with or
                     without CLTC involvement in the referral process (unless a planned
                     temporary stay for a waiver participant. Refer to Section 05.40).
                     Confirmation of payor source must be confirmed prior to termination of the
                     application. The date of closure must be the date the individual entered the
                     nursing home.

             •       Transferred to another Nursing Facility

             •       Unable to Locate Participant
                     Used for enrolled participants who after several active documented attempts
                     are unable to be located.

             Termination Reasons NOT used by CLTC:


             •           Changed Payment Source


             •           Continuum of Care (COC)


             •           Discharged to Hospital
Chapter 10-Termination                                                                    Page 6
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                             November 1, 2022

             •           Discharged from MTCM Services


             •           Incontinence Supplies Form not Received


             •           MTCM Goals met with Provider


             •           Prime – Changed MMP


             •           Returned to Community


             •           Returned to Home


             •           Terminated from Prime


The assigned SCDHHS Worker or Case Manager:

             •       Receives information which indicates the individual should be terminated.

             •       Verbally notifies involved agencies and/or providers of individual’s
                     termination, when appropriate.

             •       Notifies the individual, Authorized Representative, or other permitted
                     caregiver support verbally of reason for termination and discusses referrals
                     to other agencies when appropriate.

             •       Completes CLTC Notification Form 171 to notify participant, Medicaid
                     Eligibility, Authorized Representative, or other permitted caregiver support
                     of the reason for termination.

             •       Completes Status Changes section of Phoenix within five (5) business days
                     of CLTC Notification.

       The following must also be completed for waiver participants:

             •       Completes service(s) termination when appropriate. This must be done prior
                     to case closure.

             •       Terminates the application in Phoenix.

             •       E-mails the designated CLTC Support Staff for RSP indicator entry so
Chapter 10-Termination                                                                      Page 7
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                                   November 1, 2022

                     that entry is made within four (4) business days of waiver termination
                     date.


        The designated Support Staff:

             •       Enters termination date from program on RSP updated screen within 4
                     business days of termination in Phoenix.

          10.21.10       Transition to/from Other Waiver

                     When a participant is changing enrollment from one waiver to another
                     waiver, coordination between involved agencies must occur to ensure
                     continuity of care and continued Medicaid eligibility. The participant must
                     be terminated from the original waiver, and then enrolled in the receiving
                     waiver effective the following calendar day. Once the termination and
                     enrollment dates have been coordinated between the two involved waivers,
                     CLTC must make an entry into RSP, terminating/entering the participant
                     from the waiver, and send the CLTC Notification Form 171 to the
                     participant, Authorized Representative, and/or other permitted caregiver
                     support giving the reason for termination. Advance notice must be given to
                     all involved providers. A copy of the CLTC Notification Form 171 must be
                     sent to the receiving agency and to providers.

                     If the transfer is to a waiver that requires a different level of care, i.e., nursing
                     facility level of care to at risk for hospitalization, an assessment and level of
                     care must be completed by a SCDHHS Worker prior to the transfer.


                     The assigned SCDHHS Worker or Case Manager:

                     •         Coordinates with receiving waiver and participant to ensure
                               continuity of care and continued Medicaid eligibility.

                     •         Notifies involved providers in advance of planned termination.

                     •         Terminates all waiver service authorizations.

                     •         Terminates participant from CLTC waiver once appropriate written
                               notification is obtained from receiving waiver.

                     •         Completes CLTC Notification Form 171 to notify the receiving
                               waiver and participant of the reason for termination.

                     •         Routes to the designated Support Staff for mailing of any
                               appropriate correspondence and for keying RSP as appropriate.


Chapter 10-Termination                                                                            Page 8
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                                 November 1, 2022

      10.22       Transfer of Waiver Participant to Other CLTC Region

              When a waiver participant relocates to another CLTC region, the case can be
              transferred to another CLTC Area Office for continued case management and other
              waivered services.

              Note: Transfer of a pending waiver participant is addressed in Section
                     02.80.

              For the transferring waiver case, the transferring and receiving CLTC Area Offices
              must verbally coordinate activities as outlined:

              •        The transferring Area Office must verbally notify the receiving Area Office
                       of the pending transfer and give the new location of the participant.

              •        The assigned Case Manager will review the open authorizations with the
                       receiving Area Office.

              •        The assigned Case Manager in the transferring Area Office will email the
                       Case Manager II in the receiving Area Office to make the transfer referral
                       official when the participant’s move has occurred, or the imminent date is
                       known. Documentation of all activities is mandatory.

              •        The receiving Area Office will advise the participant/Authorized
                       Representative of the available provider options in the prospective new
                       location.

              •        If a participant moves to another county and there is an open APS case or a
                       referral has been made on a participant, the transferring Provider Case
                       Manager, Case Manager, Case Manager II or Nurse Consultant should
                       notify the assigned APS worker of the participant’s move to a new location.

              •        If a participant moves to another county and there is an open APS case or a
                       referral has been made on the participant, the transferring Provider Case
                       Manager, Case Manager, Case Manager II or Nurse Consultant will
                       notify the receiving Area Office.

              •        The receiving Area Office will review all service authorizations and will
                       contact the provider to determine if the authorized service may continue
                       in the receiving area. The receiving Area Office will confirm that the
                       provider number is correct. If upon review the provider number is found
                       to be incorrect, the receiving Area Office will complete the authorization
                       using the correct provider number. The transferring Area Office should
                       ensure all forms or documents not available in Phoenix are scanned to
                       the Participant’s Phoenix file.

              •        Do not terminate the application and do not close in RSP.
Chapter 10-Termination                                                                       Page 9
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                                November 1, 2022


             •       The transferring Area Office cues Phoenix to transfer the case, verbally
                     notifies the receiving office, as the transferring Area Office will no longer be
                     able to enter information in Phoenix. The transferring CLTC Worker must
                     have all their actions completed before cuing the transfer. Documentation
                     must include the name of the individual informed of the transfer.

             •       A Re-evaluation is not required upon transfer unless the re-evaluation was
                     not completed timely in the transferring Area Office. The case is accepted
                     “as is” and the receiving Case Manager will be responsible for completing
                     the re-evaluation.

             •       The Case Manager II of the receiving Area Office conducts a telephone
                     contact at the time of transfer to update any pertinent information.

             •       The Case Manager II of the receiving Area Office should obtain the case
                     management choice if the current choice of Case Management is not
                     available in the receiving Area Office.

             •       The ongoing Case Manager should complete a new “Home Assessment” at
                     the next scheduled home visit after the transfer.

             •       The ongoing Case Manager should maintain the original re-evaluation
                     cycle.

             Note: An initial Case Manager visit is not required.

             A new provider choice is needed only if selecting a provider.

             •       If after transfer a case is found by the receiving Area Office to be medically
                     ineligible, the receiving Case Manager should seek input from the primary
                     physician. If the applicant is determined medically ineligible after receiving
                     information from the physician, the case should be reviewed by the Lead
                     Team Case Manager and/or Area Administrator. If the Area Office is
                     unable to make a level of care determination, Central Office should be
                     notified.

             •       If after transfer a case is found to have a re-evaluation to be past due, the re-
                     evaluation should be completed within seven (7) business days and the Lead
                     Team Case Manager and Area Administrator should be notified.


  10.23     Applications involving more than one CLTC Area Office:

             All applications are not auto assigned in Phoenix. If action has already been taken
             on assigned application in one area, the SCDHHS Worker receiving the new
             application will consult with the primary SCDHHS Worker already assigned for
             completion of both applications.
Chapter 10-Termination                                                                        Page 10
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 10 – Termination and Transfer Procedures                         November 1, 2022



             For example, a waiver application is received in the Area Office, assigned and
             contact has been made. A NHP application is received in another Area office. The
             SCDHHS Worker that receives the NHP application will contact the SCDHHS
             Worker assigned to the waiver application for completion of both applications to
             maintain consistency.




Chapter 10-Termination                                                                Page 11
