  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                                                                                   November 1, 2022


                                                       TABLE OF CONTENTS

11.10    Introduction.......................................................................................................................................... 2


11.20   Appeals Policy and Procedure ............................................................................................................ 3


   11.21 SCDHHS Pre-Hearing Conference Order................................................................................... 3


   11.22 Appeals - Level of Care and Waiver Services ............................................................................ 4


        11.22.10         Appeals Presentation ......................................................................................................... 8


11.30    Subpoena Policy .................................................................................................................................. 9


11.40    Release of Participant Information ................................................................................................. 10




 Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                                                                              Page 1
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                               November 1, 2022

11.10 Introduction

      Any Medicaid applicant or recipient has the right to request an appeal of any decision
      by CLTC which adversely affects the eligibility status and/or receipt of services and/or
      assistance. The formal process of review and adjudication of CLTC actions/determinations
      is done under the authority of Section 1-23-310 et. seq., Code of Laws, State of South
      Carolina, 1976, as amended, and the Department of Health and Human Services regulations
      Section 126-150, et.seq.




Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                    Page 2
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                                   November 1, 2022


11.20 Appeals Policy and Procedure

   11.21      SCDHHS Pre-Hearing Conference Order

      Purpose of Pre-Hearing Conference:

      •       Allows an opportunity to discuss issues being appealed prior to a hearing.

      •       Offers an opportunity for the parties to come to a mutual agreement and avoid an
              appeal hearing.

      •       Allows SCDHHS to explain the policy or regulations which support why the
              decision was made.

      •       Allows Petitioner (applicant, participant or Authorized Representative) to provide
              any additional or clarifying information related to the appeal.

      •       Allows CLTC/SCDHHS to offer alternatives/community resources.

              Procedure:

      •       Pre-Hearing Conferences are ordered by the assigned Hearing Officer.

      •       The conference may be held in person or by phone, unless otherwise specified in the
              Hearing Officer’s order.

      •       The conference must be held timely for all parties to meet the deadlines set by the
              H earing O fficer regarding completion of the conference and providing a response.

      Note: The Petitioner and the Respondent are required to submit a written summary of
             the conference. The Petitioner must be given adequate time to write and mail the
             summary to the Hearing Officer.

      •       Read the order carefully as the Hearing Officer may request other information.

      •       The CLTC/SCDHHS representative (Area Administrator, Lead Team or
              Central Office Designee) contacts the Petitioner (applicant, participant or
              designated representative) if the Hearing Officer’s order so states to schedule the
              pre-hearing conference.

      •       At the pre-arranged time, the CLTC representative will contact or visit the
              applicant or participant and include the Petitioner, if other than the
Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                       Page 3
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                                    November 1, 2022

              applicant/participant.

      •       During the conference, CLTC representative will address all points listed in the
              pre-hearing conference order.

      •       At the conclusion of the conference, the CLTC representative will determine
              whether or not the Petitioner wishes to continue with the appeal.

      •       Following the conference, the CLTC representative will write a summary of the
              conference.

      •       The CLTC representative will mail a copy of the summary to the Petitioner by
              regular and certified mail and will send a copy of the summary to the H earing
              Officer and the Central Office Designee by email, interagency mail or regular mail
              by the deadline indicated in the order.

      Pre-Conference Hearing Summary: Pre-hearing Conference

      Will be written on Agency Letterhead and must include the following:

      1.      Conference participant and location (i.e., telephone, participant’s home, etc.)

      2.      Points discussed

      3.      Solutions reached

      4.      Any outstanding issues

      5.      Any additional information requested by the Hearing Officer

      6.      All parties to whom a copy of the summary was sent and by what means.

  11.22 Appeals - Level of Care and Waiver Services

      An applicant or participant designated representative who disagrees with a level of care
      decision made by SCDHHS has the right to request an appeal of the decision. A participant
      or Authorized Representative has the right to request an appeal of SCDHHS’s/CLTC's
      decision to deny, reduce, suspend, or terminate a waiver service.

      To initiate the appeal process, an applicant, participant, or Authorized Representative must
      submit a request stating the issue to be appealed including a copy of the CLTC Notification
      Form issued. The request must be sent to the Division of Appeals and Hearings no later
      than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notification.


Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                            Page 4
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                                       November 1, 2022

      Appeals must be submitted online at www.scdhhs.gov/appeals; or by
      fax at (803) 255-8251;
      or by via mail to:
      Division of Appeals and Hearings Post
      Office Box 8206
      Columbia, South Carolina 29202-8206
      or verbally by calling-1-888-549-0820

       A participant may be eligible to receive continued benefits/services pending an appeal
      hearing decision. If the participant is interested in continued benefits while an appeal is
      pending, the participant or Authorized Representative must request a hearing and provide
      notification to the assigned CLTC case manager prior to the date of action indicated on the
      CLTC Notification Form.

      A participant may be eligible to have services reinstated pending an appeal hearing
      decision. If the participant is interested in reinstating benefits, the participant or Authorized
      Representative must request a hearing and request reinstatement of services within ten (10)
      calendar days after the date of action indicated on the CLTC Notification Form. The
      participant/ Authorized Representative must notify the assigned CLTC case worker of this
      request.

      Service will not be resumed or reinstated while the case is pending an appeal hearing
      if the date of action has passed.

      If the Hearing Officer’s decision in not in the favor of the participant or designated
      representative, federal regulations allow South Carolina Department of Health and Human
      Services to seek payment of the cost of Medicaid benefits received while waiting thirty (30)
      calendar days of receipt of the CLTC Notification, CLTC’s decision will be final and binding.
      A request for a fair hearing by mail is considered filed if postmarked by the thirtieth (30th)
      calendar day following receipt of the CLTC notification.

      Information regarding the individual's right to appeal and instructions for initiating an appeal
      are printed on the Level of Care Certification DHHS Form 185 and the CLTC Notification
      Form 171.

      Once an appeal has been arranged, the Hearing Officer will notify the CLTC Area Office
      and/or the SCDHHS Central Office of the date, time and location of the hearing. The CLTC
      Area Office is primarily responsible for organizing CLTC's presentation at the hearing.
      S C D H H S Central Office will provide technical assistance to staff in preparation for
      the hearing.

      In hearing a contested case, a subpoena may be issued for the attendance and testimony
      of witnesses and the production and examination of records. If a subpoena is needed,
      the CLTC Area Office must notify SCDHHS Central Office ten to fifteen (10-15)
      days prior to the date of the hearing. It is best if the witness will come to the hearing on
      a voluntary basis, but if in doubt, the subpoena should be requested by the CLTC Area
      Office. The CLTC Area Office should alert the witness that the subpoena will be served.
Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                             Page 5
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                                    November 1, 2022




      Note: If a CLTC staff person or contract Case Manager is subpoenaed, follow the agency
             subpoena policy.

      There will be times when legal representation will be needed. SCDHHS Central Office
      should be notified so a request can be sent to the SCDHHS Office of General Counsel. The
      attorney must have time to review the case and make contact with the appropriate parties.

      Upon receiving a copy of an Appeals Notification Letter that was sent to the participant/
      Authorized Representative by the SCDHHS Division of Appeals and Hearings, the Area
      Administrator will:

      •       Review the case with the designated Lead Team to ensure the Nurse
              Consultant or Case Manager has followed appropriate procedures.

      •       Inform the appropriate Nurse Consultant or Case Manager and designated
              Lead Team of the date, time, and location of the hearing.

      The designated Lead Team and/or Area Administrator:

      •       Meets with the Nurse Consultant or Case Manager to discuss the appropriate
              actions to take in presenting the case at the hearing.
      •       Reviews the case for the possible need for subpoena of record or legal
              representation at the hearing. If a subpoena is necessary, notifies SCDHHS Central
              Office.
      •       Contacts SCDHHS Central Office staff if legal representation is to be requested or if
              there are any questions.

      The assigned Nurse Consultant or Case Manager:

      •       Completes an appropriate summary, and

      •       Routes case file with completed appropriate summary to designated Support
              Staff with instructions of information to be mailed:

      For an appeal of a level of care decision the following must be sent to the Hearing
      Officer:

      1.      Assessment

      2.      Medication List

      3.      Physician’s Input Letter, if applicable

      4.      CLTC Medical Consultant’s level of care determination, if applicable
Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                          Page 6
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                                 November 1, 2022



      5.      Narrative
      6.      Level of Care Certification DHHS Form 185 or CLTC Notification Form 171

      7.      The Guideline for Developmental States for applicants/participants under 6
              years old.

      8.      Copy of the Policy, Scope of Service or other CLTC document which supports the
              Agency’s decision. For example, Quick Reference Level of Care Guide.



      Copies must be made for the State Agency representative, the Hearing Officer and the
      Petitioner (Applicant, Participant or Authorized Representative).

      Note: The Hearing Officer will issue a hearing order or notice. The order or notice should
             be closely followed as to the documentation needed prior to the hearing. Procedural
             questions may be directed to the Hearing Officer.

      For an appeal of a decision to deny, terminate, reduce, or suspend waiver services,
      the following must be sent to the Hearing Officer:

      1.      CLTC Notification Form 171 including the Appeals Notice.

      2.      Written summary on Agency Letterhead of services terminated,

      3.      Other pertinent information such as medical records, Service Provision Forms
              and/or service plan(s).

      4.      Copy of the CLTC Policy, Scope of Service or other CLTC document which
              supports the decision.
      Copies must be made for the State Agency Representative, the Hearing Officer and the
      Petitioner/Representative. The copies must be brought to the appeals hearing. The
      information packet for the Hearing Officer must be sent as soon as possible to the Division
      of Appeals and Hearings by Interagency mail, email or certified mail.
      NOTE: During the appeal process, any information shared or discussed with the Hearing
      Officer must also be shared with the petitioner. Ex parte communication with the Hearing
      Officer is prohibited

      The assigned Nurse Consultant or Case Manager:

      •       Prepares a summary on Agency Letterhead of case actions from Intake to
              formal denial.


Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                       Page 7
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                                  November 1, 2022

      •       Consults with designated Lead Team, Area Administrator, and SCDHHS
              Central Office, as needed.


      •       Meets with SCDHHS Central Office or Office of General Counsel staff before the
              hearing, if necessary.

      11.22.10     Appeals Presentation

              The Designated State Worker(s) (Nurse Consultant, Lead Team Case Manager
              and/or Area Administrator) will present the case at the Appeals Hearing, as
              appropriate. If the assigned Case Manager is a contract worker, the Lead
              Team Case Manager or the Area Administrator will represent the Agency. If
              the Area Administrator decides a contract Case Manager should attend the
              hearing, SCDHHS Central Office should be notified.

              The Hearing Officer’s decision will be sent to the CLTC Area Office and
              S C D H H S Central Office by mail or email following the hearing. If the
              Agency’s decision is AFFIRMED, this means the decision was in the Respondent’s
              (Agency’s) favor. If the Agency’s decision is REVERSED, this means the decision
              is in favor of the Petitioner’s (applicant’s, participant’s or Authorized
              Representative’s).

              The designated Lead Team

              •        Confers with SCDHHS Central Office regarding any post-Appeal actions.

              •        Attends the hearing if necessary.

               SCDHHS Central Office

               •       Attends the hearing if necessary.

               •       Communicates any post-appeal actions required based on the Appeal
                       Hearing decision to the CLTC Area Office and/or Medicaid Eligibility.




Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                       Page 8
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                           November 1, 2022



  11.30 Subpoena Policy

      If a CLTC employee, provider Case Manager, or program representative receives a
      subpoena requesting CLTC/SCDHHS provide documents to a court, or appear in court to
      testify, or complete any documents, the CLTC Area Office Administrator must be
      notified immediately. The Area Administrator will contact SCDHHS Central Office and
      SCDHHS Office of General Counsel to inform the Agency of the subpoena being served
      and to seek guidance as to actions required. A copy of the subpoena will be sent to
      SCDHHS Central Office and SCDHHS Office of General Counsel as soon as it is
      received in the Area Office. The SCDHHS Central Office Designee will coordinate any
      actions needed with the CLTC Area Office and the Office of General Counsel.




Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                Page 9
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                                      November 1, 2022

11.40   Release of Participant Information

        No participant information may be released without prior approval of SCDHHS Central
        Office and/or SCDHHS Office of General Counsel. Under most circumstances, the
        information contained in applicant/participant records is protected by state and federal laws
        or regulations and may not be provided without specific written authorization of release. This
        authorization is a separate document from the CLTC Consent Form. Unauthorized release
        of this information may be considered a misdemeanor punishable by fine, imprisonment or
        both.
        •        The CLTC Area Office Worker receiving the request for information should ask
                 for and receive a copy of any required written authorization and seek guidance
                 from the CLTC Area Office Administrator.

        •      The requestor’s identity must be verified. Faxed authorizations are acceptable.

        •      The Area Administrator will seek approval from the SCDHHS Central Office
               Designee via email and will include any required authorization of release as an
               attachment. The Office of General Counsel may be contacted directly by the Area
               Administrator by email.

        •      The email should include any authorization of releases as an attachment and the
               email should be copied to the SCDHHS Central Office Designee.

        Each CLTC Area Office should select a designee who will be responsible for logging
        information regarding release of information on the CLTC Area Office tracking log. This
        log must be submitted monthly to the Central Office Designee.

        •      Once approval is received to release the information, the Area Administrator will
               notify the state worker designated to maintain the tracking log of the request
               approval, the purpose of the release if information and the full name of the person
               to whom the information is being provided.

        •      The designated State Worker will log the required information on the tracking form.

        Note: In some cases, the Office of General Counsel will provide the information
               directly, especially if the requesting entity will be charged for processing the
               request. The Office of General Counsel will maintain a log of those requests in their
               office.

        •      The CLTC Area Office Worker will print the requested information and either fax
               or mail it to the requesting party. The information may be provided in person if
               the participant is in the CLTC Area Office.


        •      The CLTC Area Office Worker will document the request, approval and release
               of the information in the Participant’s narrative. The type of information released
               must be indicated in this documentation.
Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                            Page 10
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 11 – Appeals Procedures                                               November 1, 2022



      •       Any required authorization for release of information must be scanned into
              Phoenix under the Participant’s “Scans” tab and the hard copy will be maintained
              in the Participant’s file.

      NOTE: During the appeal process, any information shared or discussed with the
          Hearing Officer must also be shared with the petitioner. Ex parte
          communication with the Hearing Officer is prohibited.




Chapter 11 – Appeals                                                                    Page 11
