 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                                                            July 1, 2023



                                                        Table of Contents

        07.10       Introduction .............................................................................................................. 3

        07.20       Service Authorization Policy and Procedure ........................................................... 4
                  07.21 Waiver Services ........................................................................................... 4
                  07.22 Choice of Waiver Service Provider(s) ......................................................... 5
                  07.23 Authorization of Waiver Services ................................................................ 8
                  07.24 Verifying Service Delivery of Authorized Services .................................. 10
                  07.25 Change/Termination of Waiver Service .................................................... 10
                   07.25.10 Temporary increase in services ............................................................ 12
                  07.26 Rationale for Increased Service Units ........................................................ 12
                  07.27 Justifications for Prior Approval Requests ................................................ 13
                   07.27.10 Timeliness Standards of Justifications for Prior Approval Requests
                   ................................................................................................................................. 14
                   07.27.20 Pend or Deny a Justification .............................................................. 14

        07.30      Waiver Interactions with Other Programs .............................................................. 16
                  07.31 Waiver Interactions with Community Residential Care Facility ............... 16
                   07.31.10 Waiver Participants Residing in a Community Residential Care . 16
                   Facility (CRCF) ..................................................................................................... 16
                   07.31.20 Relocation/ Termination of a Participant in a Non-Compliant ..... 17
                   Community Residential Care Facility ................................................................. 17
                  07.32 Waiver Interactions with Medicaid State Plan Incontinence Supplies ...... 17
                  07.33 Waiver Interactions with Hospice .............................................................. 21

        SERVICE ADDENDUMS .................................................................................................. 22
           7A Adult Day Health Care .......................................................................................... 22
           7B Adult Day Health Care-Nursing ............................................................................ 24
           7C Attendant Care ....................................................................................................... 26
           7D Handheld Shower .................................................................................................. 36
           7E Case Management .................................................................................................. 37
           7F Companion Services ............................................................................................ 39
           7G Environmental Modifications ................................................................................ 43
           7G 1 Fans/Air Conditioners ........................................................................................ 44
           7G 2 Ramps ................................................................................................................. 45
           7G-3 Enhanced Environmental Modifications ............................................................ 48
           7G 4 Enhanced Environmental Modifications and a Ramp ........................................ 50
           7H Advanced Pest Control .......................................................................................... 53
           7I Home Delivered Meals ........................................................................................... 56
           7J Nutritional Supplements ......................................................................................... 57
           7K Personal Care Services .......................................................................................... 60

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                                                                         Page 1
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                                                 July 1, 2023

                7L Personal Emergency Response System .............................................................. 62
                7M Pest Control ....................................................................................................... 64
                7N Respite - Community Residential Care Facility................................................. 66
                7O Respite Care - Institutional (Nursing Home or Hospital) .................................. 68
                7P Telemonitoring ................................................................................................... 70
                7Q Community Residential Care Facility Interactions with Home and Community
                Based Waiver Programs November 2022 ................................................................ 72
                7RHospice Benefit Interactions ............................................................................... 73




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                                                             Page 2
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023


07.10    Introduction

          Service authorization is the process of issuing a written document, which enables
          enrolled service providers to initiate home and community-based services for
          participants. The service authorization is based on the finalized service plan for an
          individual CLTC participant.

          The CLTC Participant's Rights and Responsibilities Statement includes several
          expectations that both a participant and CLTC must abide by if the participant
          receives waiver services. These expectations are critical to the effective delivery of
          services and should be carefully communicated to the participant.

          Restrictions on amount of services that a waiver participant receives may be
          necessary. If this is determined to be the situation, such restrictions will be
          communicated to staff as interim policy and procedures.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 3
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023

07.20    Service Authorization Policy and Procedure

     07.21       Waiver Services

             The purpose of waiver services is to provide realistic options for participants who
             choose to remain at home and thus avoid unnecessary or premature nursing home
             placement.

             Waiver services are provided by contracted and enrolled Medicaid providers to
             eligible participants and may include:

             •        Adult Day Health Care *
             •        Adult Day Health Care Nursing*
             •        Attendant Care
             •        Handheld Shower
             •        Case Management *
             •        Companion Services: Individual and Agency (* agency only)
             •        Environmental Modifications
             •        Enhanced Environmental Modifications
             •        Advanced Pest Control
             •        Home Delivered Meals *
             •        Nutritional Supplements
             •        *
             •        Personal Care Services *
             •        Personal Emergency Response System
             •        Pest Control
             •        Respite Care: Institutional *, Community Residential Care Facility *
             •        Telemonitoring

             * indicates a scope of service is available

             A scope of service exists for many of the waiver services and is part of the agreement
             which defines both provider and CLTC's responsibilities in the provision of waiver
             services. See the Chapter 7 Service Addendums for more information.

             Self-Directed Waiver Services may not be provided by the following individuals:
             1.     A parent, stepparent, or foster parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

             2.       Any person who the legal responsibility of utilize their own assets for the care
                      of the Medicaid Participant. (legally responsible adults)_


             All other Waiver services may not be provided by the following individuals:

             1.       The spouse of the Medicaid participant (including married but separated).
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 4
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                        July 1, 2023

                      Common law marriage is not recognized in South Carolina effective July 24,
                      2019; therefore, a significant other residing in a participant’s household could
                      be a paid caregiver if all other requirements are met.

             2.       A parent, stepparent, or foster parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

             3.       Any other legally responsible guardian (court ordered) of a Medicaid
                      participant. Power of Attorney (POA) alone does not equate to being the
                      legally responsible guardian;

             4.       A person who is the primary caregiver cannot be paid to provide respite. The
                      reason for this is these two services are primarily designed to give relief to the
                      primary caregiver.


             Note: The Authorized Representative cannot serve as the supervisor of the paid
             caregiver and be the paid caregiver. This would mean the person was supervising
             himself/herself. Should there be any question as to whether a paid caregiver falls in
             any of the above listed categories, contact the Area Administrator of the Area
             Office servicing the participant.

             Several factors influence authorization of waiver services. These factors include:

             1.       The participant’s type of support system and the assistance provided.

             2.       The degree of assistance needed, and the time required to complete the care.

             3.       The participant’s cognitive ability and its impact on the degree of assistance
                      required and the time required to complete the care.

             4.       The participant’s expressed need for assistance and the value the participant
                      assigns to these needs.

             5.       The availability of other resources to meet these needs.

             6.       The most cost-effective way to meet these needs.

             In summary, waiver services should only be authorized when there is a lack of
             available Non-Medicaid services to meet the participant's needs as specified in the
             CLTC Service Plan.

 07.22     Choice of Waiver Service Provider(s)

             A participant, and/or Authorized Representative must make a choice of provider for
             each waiver service. Note: If contacted by a non-Authorized Representative,
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                                Page 5
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023

             information can be obtained from this person, but information cannot be given or
             discussed with this person. Information regarding the participant can only be shared
             with the participant or Authorized Representative. Information discussed with a non-
             Authorized Representative is considered a HIPAA violation.

             When the initial assessment is completed by in-home visit, the choice of case
             management provider is documented on the participant's Service Provider Report
             (Provider Choice Form) during the SCDHHS worker’s assessment visit.

             When the initial assessment is completed by phone, the choice of case management
             provider will be obtained by the Case Manager II when the case is transferred for
             enrollment.

             The Case Manager II will document the provider choice(s) in order of preference in
             the narrative record. The provider choice form should be scanned into Phoenix. The
             remaining waiver services will be explained to the participant, Authorized
             Representative, and/or other permitted caregiver supports during the Case Manager’s
             initial phone contact or visit at which time the participant, Authorized Representative,
             and/or other permitted caregiver supports may make a verbal choice of provider for a
             needed service or services.

             •        The verbal choice must be annotated on the Service Provider Report (Provider
                      Choice Form) scanned into Phoenix and documented in the narrative record
                      in order of preference.

             •        If a verbal choice cannot be obtained, a participant’s Service Provider Report
                      (Provider Choice Form) will be mailed to the participant and/or Authorized
                      Representative. (Refer to Chapter 5, 05.20 Waiver Enrollment for more
                      information.)

             The participant Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) is discussed with the
             participant, Authorized Representative, and/or other permitted caregiver supports
             during the Case Manager’s Initial Visit.

             During this visit, the signature is secured for previous verbal choice(s).

             •        Subsequent changes or additions of providers are made verbally and
                      documented in the narrative and need not be documented on the participant
                      Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form).
             •        The participant, Authorized Representative, and/or other permitted caregiver
                      supports are to make all decisions regarding provider choice independently.
             •        The Case Manager must not influence a participant’s choice of providers.
             •        If a participant is not physically or mentally able to complete and/or sign the
                      participant Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form), the Authorized
                      Representative or other permitted caregiver supports may sign for the

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 6
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023

                      participant.
             •        The lack of a signature on the form will not preclude the participant from
                      receiving waiver services.

             Any time the participant, Authorized Representative, and/or other permitted caregiver
             support request an additional waiver service or a change in providers, the Case
             Manager will inform the participant, Authorized Representative, and/or other
             permitted caregiver supports of all available providers of the service(s). The Case
             Manager must narrate this information exchange as well as the choice of provider(s),
             in order of preference in the narrative record. The participant, Authorized
             Representative, and/or other permitted caregiver supports may request a change of
             provider for any service, including Case Management, at any time.

              When creating a referral, the Case Manager will enter the provider choices in order
             of preference. Phoenix will automatically refer and notify the next Provider of Choice
             if a referral is declined, or an affirmative response has not been received from the first
             chosen provider within forty-eight (48) business hours.

             Note: When a participant is subject to a waiting period for Medicaid Eligibility,
             the Case Manager will add a comment to the referral stating, “Participant is
             subject to a waiting period for Medicaid Eligibility and payment may be
             delayed.”

             It is the responsibility of Central Office to keep a continuously updated Resource
             Directory for each waiver service available in that region.

             PROCESS:

             •        SCDHHS worker will provide CLTC Brochure and CLTC Choosing a Case
                      Manager brochure and secure participant/Authorized Representative signature
                      on the initial Case Management Provider Choice Form if a home visit is
                      completed.

             •        If the initial assessment is completed by phone, the Case Manager II will
                      obtain the Case Management Provider Choice verbally during the enrollment
                      process. These choices must be documented on the Service Provider Report
                      (Provider Choice Form) and in the narrative record in order of preference. The
                      provider choice form should also be scanned into Phoenix. The Case
                      Manager will provide the CLTC Brochure and the CLTC Choosing a Case
                      Manager Brochure at the Initial Visit.

             •        Upon enrollment, the Case Manager II will contact                      or     visit
                      participant/Authorized Representative for service planning.

             •        If service provider choices cannot be made by phone, Case Manager II will
                      send appropriate Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) for the
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                                 Page 7
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

                      negotiated services. Case Manager II will contact the participant and/or
                      Authorized Representative within seven (7) business days from mailing the
                      list regarding choice of providers. A copy of the signed provider choice form
                      with the choice date should be scanned in Phoenix Scans under the Provider
                      Scan Tag. Upon Initial Visit by the Case Manager, this form will be signed
                      and dated by participant/Authorized Representative. If contact to complete
                      service planning is by visit, the Case Manager II will have the choice form
                      signed when choice is made.

             •        New cases may be transferred to the on-going Case Manager at any time
                      during the month; however, the Initial Visit time frame requirements must be
                      considered. Adequate time must be allowed for the Case Manager to
                      complete the Initial Visit within the thirty (30) day timeliness requirement.

             *Exception: If the Initial Visit is due within five (5) business days of the Case
                        Management referral, the Case Manager must complete the visit within
                        ten (10) days of accepting the referral. The late visit activity will not be
                        subject to sanction for timeliness if the Initial Visit is made within ten
                        (10) business days of the referral acceptance.

             •        Assigned Case Manager will follow up on service provider choices and
                      referrals/authorizations in process by the State Case Manager.

     07.23       Authorization of Waiver Services

             Before any waiver services are authorized, it is crucial that the Case Manager be
             familiar with all scopes of services and standards of services. Waiver services are
             based on a participant’s needs as documented in the Service Plan. Services must
             receive prior approval from a designated State Worker. Waiver services for waiver
             participants of the Medicare-Medicaid Managed Plans (MMP) program are prior
             approved by the MMP designee.

             Upon receipt of a participant’s choice of provider (Section 07.22) and prior approval
             of a service (Section 07.27), the Case Manager must initiate referrals to the chosen
             providers within two (2) business days.

             The referral process is completed in Phoenix and must include any special needs or
             preferences of the participant. A chosen provider must be given the opportunity to
             accept or reject the referral. Providers must respond within 48 business hours. Once
             a start date has been negotiated with a provider, the case manager has two (2) business
             days to complete and send the service provision form to the provider. (Exceptions to
             this policy is Adult Day Health Care which is referred but not authorized until receipt
             of the physician’s order.) All waiver services are authorized by completion of the
             service provision form.

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 8
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023

             It is acceptable to authorize waiver services on the day of admission to or discharge
             from an institution (i.e., hospital, nursing home, rehabilitation center, psychiatric
             facility) The narrative must clearly document the need for such services.

             Weekly services must have a Sunday start date for a change in service and not for the
             initial authorization for service.

             The authorization period end date may or may not be indicated on the Service
             Provision Form. An end date is included when the service is required for a known
             duration, if less than thirty (30) days from the start date. The authorized end date is a
             valid date of service delivery. Authorizations without an end date are valid until a new
             service authorization or termination is issued to the provider.

             PROCESS:

             The assigned Case Manager:

             •        Contacts participant to discuss specific needs, provider choice and schedule of
                      services.

             •        Updates appropriate sections of Phoenix to indicate need for services.

             •        Updates service plan as needed.

             •        Documents provider choices in the narrative in the order of preference.

             •        Requests prior approval in the service approval section of the service plan
                      located under the Complete tab of the service plan.

             •        Once reviewed, Case Manager receives a notification on his/her dashboard.
                      When this notification is received, the Case Manager will review the prior
                      approval section (complete tab of the service plan) to determine subsequent
                      actions.

             •        Begins referral process in Phoenix within two (2) business days, listing all
                      provider choices in order of participant’s preference.

             •        When notification of referral acceptance is received, negotiates start of
                      services with the provider and participant/ Authorized Representative and
                      completes service provision form within two (2) business days. It is crucial
                      that the provision form be specific and accurate.

             •        Once the authorization is completed, the provider will have immediate access
                      to the authorization in Phoenix.

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 9
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023

             •        Service plans are available to providers in the Phoenix Provider Portal on a real
                      time basis. Exceptions to this are attendant care and respite care. These
                      processes are noted in the corresponding addendum.

             •        Verifies implementation of the service with participant or Authorized
                      Representative no later than the next scheduled contact. Environmental
                      Modifications and Handheld Shower is verified at the next contact following
                      the authorization end date. Verification of services must be documented in the
                      narrative.

             •        The case manager must CONSULT SERVICE ADDENDUMS TO
                      ENSURE     COMPLIANCE      WITH   SPECIFIC  SERVICE
                      REQUIREMENTS.

     07.24       Verifying Service Delivery of Authorized Services

             The Case Manager must address service delivery with the participant, and/or
             Authorized Representative during each scheduled contact. Care Call claims must be
             reviewed, and activities and observations reports run and reviewed. Follow-up with
             the provider(s) may be necessary to resolve questions or concerns related to service
             delivery. Problematic patterns noted in Care Call claims must be addressed. Refer to
             the P&P Chapter 5, Section 05.35, for more information regarding monitoring service
             delivery.

     07.25       Change/Termination of Waiver Service

             A change in service request should be initiated by the participant and/or Authorized
             Representative, not the service provider. If a service request/change comes from a
             provider, a telephone contact must be made to the participant or Authorized
             Representative for confirmation of need/choice. This must be documented in Phoenix
             narratives.


             When an existing service authorization requires a change, other than a change of
             provider, the Case Manager completes a service termination and creates a new
             service authorization. An increase in service levels requires approval by designated
             State Worker or MMP designee for MMP waiver participants.
             When a provider of services changes, the Case Manager must terminate the Service
             Provision Form with the previous provider and initiate a new service authorization
             for the chosen provider. The terminated Service Provision Form and the new Service
             Provision Form can be accessed in the Phoenix provider portal with the exception of
             Attendants, Individual Companion, and respite services.

             When a service is changed for a weekly service, but the provider does not change, the
             authorization start date must be Sunday.
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                               Page 10
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023


             Services must be terminated if a participant no longer requires the service or if the
             participant becomes ineligible to receive the service. Waiver services may be
             terminated at any time during a re-evaluation cycle. Termination of a service will
             necessitate a revision of the service plan. Services will remain in effect through the
             date of termination on the Service Provision Form.

             When services are involuntarily suspended, reduced, or terminated, the participant
             must be given a written appeal notice, as well as a written ten (10) business day
             notice prior to the service being terminated. The participant and/or Authorized
             Representative may file an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days of the CLTC
             Notification. The participant may be eligible to receive continued benefits/services
             pending an appeal hearing decision. The participant/ Authorized Representative must
             request an appeal and notify the assigned Case Manager or the CLTC Representative
             that he/ she wants services to continue prior to the date of action on the Notification
             form. Services may also be requested to be reinstated. The appeal request and
             reinstatement of benefits request must be received within ten (10) calendar days of
             the date of action indicated on the Notification form. Services will not be resumed
             while a participant’s case is pending an appeal hearing if the date of action has passed.
             The participant and/or Authorized Representative will be informed that the participant
             may be responsible for the cost of services received during this period, if the appeal
             decision is not in the participant’s favor.

             The Notification Form is sent when services are being terminated, reduced,
             suspended, or denied. The notice must cite the specific federal regulation which
             supports CLTC’s decision. These regulations will auto-populate on the Notification
             Form when the box is checked on the form to indicate these actions.

             When a participant is determined to be financially ineligible, waiver services must be
             terminated on the last date of eligibility. This action must be documented in the
             narrative. A CLTC Notification Form will be sent to the participant/Authorized
             Representative; however, the Appeals Notice will not be included. Both the participant
             and provider must be notified verbally at the time of service termination if the
             termination is immediate. This verbal notification must be followed with a service
             termination to the provider and a notification form to the participant and appropriate
             parties. The Conversation feature in Phoenix may be used in instances where
             immediate information is not required and when appropriate.

             When a medically ineligible decision is final for a waiver participant, waiver services
             must be terminated in accordance with proper notice to the provider.

             When services are voluntarily suspended, reduced, or terminated, an appeals notice is
             not to be sent to the participant/ Authorized Representative. A CLTC Notification
             Form must be sent stating the change was made at the request of the participant and/
             or Authorized Representative.

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 11
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023


             If a requested service is denied, a CLTC Notification Form must be sent stating what
             service was denied and the appeals notice must be given. A ten (10) day notice is not
             required.

             Notification Forms must be mailed within two (2) business days.

         07.25.10 Temporary increase in services

                      The case manager may do an authorization for up to 10 units above the current
                      approved level for an authorization that is not longer than one-week (seven
                      (7) business days). The authorization must have a start and end date. For
                      example, if the approved level for personal care services is 10 hours per week,
                      the case manager can authorize 20 hours of personal care services with an end
                      date no more than seven business days after the start date. In instances where
                      the participant receives multiple services ( personal care services,
                      companion), the total for all combined services can only be increased up to 10
                      units. For example, if a participant receives, 10 hours per week personal care
                      services, and 5 hours per week companion services, the Case Manager may
                      increase the personal care services up to 20 hours (increase of 10 units) with
                      an end date no more than seven business days after the start date while keeping
                      all other service levels the same.

                      Note: If an increase is needed for longer than one week for units greater
                      than the current approved level, a new service level must be approved.

     07.26     Rationale for Increased Service Units

             For Adult Day Health Care, Personal Care Services, Agency Companion, Individual
             Companion and/or Attendant Care:

             When a participant is determined to need a change in the level of services provided, the
             Case Manager must review all services and strive to meet the needs of the
             participant. The need for the increase in service units must be justified by the
             assessment, narrative and service plan.

             If the participant is not authorized for Adult Day Health Care OR the participant is
             authorized for Adult Day Health Care two (2) days or less per week, the services of
             Personal Care Services, Agency Companion, Individual Companion and/or Attendant
             Care can be approved by the State Reviewers in any combination not to exceed twenty
             (20) hours per week. The Area Administrator or Lead Team may approve any
             service combination up to 40 hours per week. Service combinations over 40 hours
             require Central Office approval.

             If the participant is authorized for Adult Day Health Care three (3) or more days per
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 12
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

             week, the services of the Personal Care Services, Agency Companion, Individual
             Companion and/or Attendant Care can be approved by the State Reviewers in any
             combination not to exceed fifteen (15) hours per week. The Area Administrator or
             Lead Team may approve any service combination up to 35 hours per week. Service
             combinations over 35 hours require Central Office approval.

             The Case Manager must provide justification of the need for increased service units
             in the comments section of the approval request section of the Service Plan (located
             under the Complete tab) and submit the request through Phoenix to the Area
             Administrator or Lead Team for approval. The Area Administrator or Lead Team
             reviewing the request will enter a comment indicating approval or denial. If the
             request exceeds the number of hours which may be approved by the Area
             Administrator or Lead Team and the need is justified, the request is sent to the
             Central Office Waiver Service Exceptions for review. The Case Manager will
             send an email request to WES@scdhhs.gov asking for review of the request after
             approval from the Area Administrator or Lead Team is obtained. The Central
             Office Waiver Service Exception Team will review the request in Phoenix,
             complete the review column and indicate the decision in the comment section. The
             Case Manager will be notified by email from the Central Office Waiver Service
             Exceptions once the request has been reviewed.

             When Central Office Service Exception is needed for any service, the Area Office
             reviewers will review the request and enter a comment with the recommendation
             regarding the request. The reviewer will leave the review column
             blank. The Case Manager must email the Central Office Waiver Service
             Exceptions at WES@scdhhs.gov to request review of the exception following the
             Area Office review. The Central Office Designee will either approve or deny the
             exception request and will notify the Case Manager by email.

             Note: The prior approval review for Medicare-Medicaid Managed Plans (MMP)/
             waiver participants will be completed by the MMP Care Coordinator. The Case
             Manager will use the Phoenix Conversation feature to communicate the need for
             review by the MMP Care Coordinator. MMP Care Coordinators may approve
             service levels of Personal Care Services/ Attendant/ Companion/ Nutritional
             Supplements, etc. above the levels the CLTC Area Office may approve. A
             separate Central Office review is not needed in these cases.

     07.27     Justifications for Prior Approval Requests

             This policy describes the participant-specific information and justification required
             to be completed by the assigned case manager for the approval of a waiver service.
             Also included is the justification for Incontinence Supplies, a nonwaiver service.

             The State approver will not require any additional information in the service
             justification section of the Service Plan, as this may inhibit person-centered
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 13
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023

             planning and/or delay service provision to the participant.

             In addition to the justification, each prior approval service request requires a
             narrative documenting that the participant/Authorized Representative made
             the request. There should also be a narrative entry stating the outcome of the
             request and confirming that the referral process was initiated. Sections of the
             assessment – especially Home Assessment/Home Needs – as well as Service Plan
             Interventions should be updated to reflect service needs BEFORE the prior approval
             request is submitted.


             NOTE: Diagnoses should not be listed in the justification unless related to a specific
                  task for which the service is needed. Also, all service exceptions should be
                  sent to the Area Administrator – or to the Lead Team in the Area
                  Administrator’s absence -- for review prior to submitting to the Central
                  Office Waiver Service Exceptions email group.

             For service specific justification information refer to the service addendums at the end
             of this chapter.

         07.27.10     Timeliness Standards of Justifications for Prior Approval Requests

                      To ensure timely provision of services to participants, the following timeliness
                      standards apply:

                      •       When a case manager submits a justification request and no additional
                              information is required, the state approver has three (3) business
                              days from the date of the request to respond with an approval or
                              denial.

                      •       The case manager has three (3) business days to respond to
                              request for additional information.


                      •       If no response is received from the case manager within three (3)
                              business days, the state approver can deny the request.


                      •       Failure of the case manager to respond timely to a service level
                              request (without a valid reason) is sanctionable and a complaint
                              should be submitted in Phoenix.

          07.27.20     Pend or Deny a Justification

                      The following steps should be followed if the submitted justification does not
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 14
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                         July 1, 2023

                      include all information required for a service (i.e., narratives, failure to update
                      service plan or home assessment, etc.):

                      •       The state approver should pend the request and notify the case
                              manager of the missing information by email. An email must be sent
                              to the case manager by his or her preferred email address as listed in
                              Phoenix. Emails to the case manager must be copied to the case
                              management provider and/or the case manager’s supervisor.

                      •       To pend the request: State approver flags the request by entering
                              initials in the Worker Flag column. While in pending status, the state
                              approver should not enter units (including zero) in the review column.
                              Entering a “0” results in a denied service.

                      •       If justification is complete and correct but the narrative and/or
                              Service Plan is not, the state approver will pend the request until the
                              case manager completes the narrative and/or updates the Service
                              Plan.

                      •       If a state approver is denying an increase in services, the state
                              approver should enter the current amount authorized in the review
                              column.

                      •       Failure of the case manager to respond timely to a service level
                              request (without a valid reason) is sanctionable and a complaint
                              should be submitted in Phoenix.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                                Page 15
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                         July 1, 2023




 07.30    Waiver Interactions with Other Programs

     When a waiver participant is enrolled in or receives services from other programs, it creates
     special circumstances that dictate which services may be authorized. It is important to review
     these interactions to ensure appropriate and allowed services are being provided.

     Note: The Hospice Benefit Interactions service limitations and the CRCF service
     restrictions do not apply for MMP/ waiver participants.


         07.31     Waiver Interactions with Community Residential Care Facility


             07.31.10     Waiver Participants Residing in a Community Residential Care
                            Facility (CRCF)

                      A waiver participant may continue waiver services while residing in a CRCF if that
                      specific facility meets waiver requirements. Prior to authorizing waiver services for
                      the participant residing in a CRCF, the following questions must be asked of the
                      CRCF Administrator or designee. This information must be documented in the
                      narrative. If any answer is no, first determine why the answer is no. It may require
                      working with the CRCF to see what can be accommodated, or reviewing the
                      participant’s documentation to determine that a “no” answer is appropriate. The
                      preference is to keep a person in the waiver and explore other alternatives, such as
                      looking for a different residential setting for the participant.

                      Note: A Boarding Home considered a community location. Since the
                      Boarding Home is not licensed it is considered a normal rental residence.
                      The following questions do not apply for boarding home residents.

                      All residential settings must have the following qualities:
                      a)      Legally enforceable agreement with same responsibilities and protections
                              from eviction that tenants have under landlord/tenant law.
                      b)      Privacy in sleeping/living unit- Is there a curtain or other separation
                              between sleeping units?
                      c)      Room entrance doors lockable by participant with only appropriate staff
                              having keys.
                      d)      Choice of roommate or option to change rooms if roommate not
                              compatible.
                      e)      Freedom to furnish and decorate their sleeping/living units.
                      f)      Freedom and support to control their own schedules/activities.

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                                 Page 16
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023

                      g)      Freedom to have access to food at any time? Substitute meal available
                              upon return if out of the facility at meal time?
                      h)      Able to have visitors, of their choosing, at any time.
                      i)      Physically accessible- handicapped accessible?

             07.31.20      Relocation/ Termination of a Participant in a Non-Compliant
                             Community Residential Care Facility

                       Should relocation of a waiver participant be required in cases where the CRCF is
                       not in compliance with waiver requirements, the Case Manager or Nurse
                       Consultant will discuss all options with the participant, Authorized
                       Representative and CRCF.

                       The Case Manager or Nurse Consultant will notify the Area Administrator
                       and/or Lead Team if it is determined that a CLTC waiver participant is residing
                       in a non-compliant CRCF. The Area Administrator or Lead Team will notify
                       Central Office Designee.

                       The Case Manager or Nurse Consultant will:

                       •   Provide a list to the participant of compliant CRCFs from the Nursing
                           Facility Bed Locator.

                       •   Explain alternative options for care including other non-waiver
                           community resources or aging services.

                       •   Explain the need to re-locate to a compliant facility in order to remain
                           enrolled in waiver.

                       •   Document all decisions. Send a CLTC Notification to participant and/or
                           Authorized Representative providing a thirty (30) day notice indicating the
                           need to move to a compliant setting.

                      •
                 Refer to Waiver Interactions with Community Residential Care Facility (Refer to
                 Service Addendum 7S.)

 07.32     Waiver Interactions with Medicaid State Plan Incontinence Supplies

             Note: Please refer to the State Plan Medicaid Incontinence Supplies Policy and
                   Procedure Manual located in Phoenix HELP for complete information
                   regarding case management of non-waiver Incontinence Supplies. Refer
                   to the Medicare-Medicaid Managed Plans (MMP) Incontinence Supplies
                   guidance for complete information regarding participants enrolled in
                   MMP.

             The information below is specific to CLTC waiver/Medicaid State Plan Incontinence
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                               Page 17
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

             Supplies interactions.

             When a recipient of State Plan Incontinence Supplies, is enrolled in a CLTC waiver
             program, the Incontinence Supplies application will be transferred from an
             Incontinence Supplies Vendor to the assigned Waiver Case Manager or Area Office
             State Staff worker. The Case Manager or Area Office State Staff worker will
             ensure the Incontinence Supplies monitoring authorization has been terminated.

              If there is an open waiver case assigned to a Case Manager or Area Office State
             Staff worker and the participant needs incontinence supplies, the Case Manager or
             Area Office State Staff worker will create an Incontinence Supplies Application in
             Phoenix under the application tab. An e-Referral or Centralized Intake referral
             should not be made.

             Creating an IS Application for a current waiver participant:

             •        Create an Incontinence Supplies application under “Applications” in Phoenix.
                      The worker will indicate the participant is Medicaid eligible.

             •        Assign the application to the same CLTC worker assigned to the waiver
                      application.

             •        The Assigned Case Manager or Area Office State Staff worker will
                      complete the Incontinence Supplies assessment. The Case Manager or Area
                      Office State Staff worker should indicate the assessment is a “phone
                      assessment” by clicking the phone assessment box in Phoenix. The
                      bowel/bladder section of the Community Choices waiver assessment can be
                      used to complete the Incontinence Supplies assessment.

             •        Do not complete the separate Incontinence Supplies Service Plan.

             •        Add Incontinence Supplies to the Waiver Service Plan.

             •        Request prior approval via the service request section of the Service Plan in
                      Phoenix.

             Note: For CC waiver applicants, the Area Office State Staff worker assessing the case
                   will proceed with completing the Incontinence Supplies referral and assessment,
                   and then transfer the case to the Case Manager II/Lead Team Case Manager for
                   enrollment.

             Service Justification: State frequency of bowel or bladder incontinence and include
             “Assessment updated” if applicable. If participant has ostomy or catheter or both,
             include need due to leakage.

             •        Create the Incontinence Supplies referral. The worker will include a comment
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 18
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

                      on the Incontinence Supplies referral notifying the IS provider when there is
                      a 30 day wait.

             •        The Incontinence Supplies provider will obtain the Physician’s Certification
                      of Incontinence after receiving the referral.

             •        The Case Manager or Area Office State Staff worker will create the
                      Service Provision Form (authorization) after receiving notification of
                      acknowledgment from the provider that the Physician’s Certification of
                      Incontinence has been obtained, which can be found under Forms in Phoenix.

             •        The Physician Certification of Incontinence Statement must be obtained by
                      the IS provider prior to the Case Manager or Area Office State Staff worker
                      creating and sending the Initial Service Provision Form (authorization) for
                      Incontinence Supplies. It is the responsibility of the Case Manager or Area
                      Office State Staff worker to make sure the provider acknowledgement in
                      Phoenix states the initial Physician Certification of Incontinence Statement
                      has been obtained by the provider prior to authorizing IS. The assigned Case
                      Manager or Area Office State Staff worker will receive a Phoenix
                      notification when the provider indicates the certification has been received.

             The Case Manager or Area Office State Staff worker may view the
             acknowledgement in Phoenix Forms.

             The initial Physician Certification of Incontinence Statement is valid up to 12 months
             for waiver participants. The provider is responsible for obtaining an updated
             Physician Certification of Incontinence Statement and notifying the Case Manager
             or Area Office State Staff worker through Phoenix when the updated form is
             received. It is the Incontinence Supplies provider responsibility to request
             termination of Incontinence Supplies if the Physician Certification of Incontinence
             form expires and is not renewed.

             •        A waiver participant may receive Incontinence Supplies in a Community
                      Residential Care Facility.

             •        When Incontinence Supplies are being terminated the Case Manager or Area
                      Office State Staff worker will send a CLTC Notification Form with a ten
                      (10) business day notice to the participant/Authorized Representative prior to
                      termination of IS. The notice must indicate the reason the supplies are being
                      terminated.

             When a waiver participant, who receives Incontinence Supplies, becomes a MMP
             member, the Case Manager will:

             •        Manage Incontinence Supplies application during the six (6) month continuity
                      of care period. The six (6) month continuity of care period begins when the
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 19
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                    July 1, 2023

                      participant becomes a MMP member.

             The MMP Care Coordinator will:

             •        Contact the waiver Case Manager thirty (30) days prior to the end of the six
                      (6) month period to inform the Case Manager when the MMP Care
                      Coordinator will begin managing Incontinence Supplies for the participant.
                      This discussion will be documented in the narrative by the Case Manager.

             •        Contact the waiver Case Manager when it is time for the Incontinence
                      Supplies application to be transferred to the MMP Care Coordinator.

             The waiver Case Manager will:

             •        Send a CLTC Notification to the participant explaining the Incontinence
                      Supplies application will now be managed by the MMP Care
                      Coordinator. The notification will include the MMP Care
                      Coordinator’s contact information.

             •        Terminate the Incontinence Supplies authorizations.

             •        Request the CLTC Area Office Support Staff re-assign the
                      Incontinence Supplies application to the MMP Care Coordinator.

             •        Document all actions in the narrative.

             The MMP Care Coordinator will terminate the Incontinence Supplies application in
             Phoenix.

             When waiver applications are terminated but the participant remains Medicaid Eligible
             and continues to need Incontinence Supplies:

             •        The Incontinence Supplies Application and Incontinence Supplies Service
                      Provision Forms will remain open in Phoenix.

             •        The Waiver Case Manager or Area Office State Staff worker will ensure
                      an Initial Incontinence Supplies Assessment has been completed in Phoenix.
                      If not present, the assessment must be completed prior to re-assigning the
                      Incontinence Supplies Application.

             •        Any hard copy documents must be scanned into Phoenix Scans.

             •        The incontinence Supplies Application will be re-assigned to an Incontinence
                      Supplies vendor for service coordination. The Case Manager will notify the
                      Central Office Incontinence Supplies Specialist of the need to re-assign the
                      application to the vendor via email.
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                           Page 20
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

             Note: If the participant is transferring to a DDSN waiver, the Case Manager or Area
                  Office State Staff worker will terminate the IS Application and authorizations.
                  DDSN will then manage the Incontinence Supplies.


 07.33     Waiver Interactions with Hospice

             Waiver participants who are enrolled in Hospice Care may receive limited waiver
             services only. Participants receiving palliative care and are not enrolled in Hospice are
             eligible for all waiver services.

             Service limitations apply regardless of whether Hospice is being
             providing under Medicare or Medicaid payment. Please refer to the
             waiver service matrix under Service Addendum 7T.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 21
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023


                                     SERVICE ADDENDUMS

                                    7A Adult Day Health Care

      One (1) unit of service is a participant-day of Adult Day Health Care (ADHC) service,
      consisting of a minimum of five (5) hours in the care of the Adult Day Health Care Center.

      Exceptions: The following are examples of cases where CLTC may consider a request for
                   reimbursement even though the participant was not under the care of the center
                   for the entire five (5) hours. In all such cases, the provider must advise the
                   Case Manager. The Case Manager must notify the CLTC Area Office
                   Administrator/Lead Team Case Manager. The contact must be documented
                   in Phoenix.

     •       If the participant has a medical emergency, non-scheduled medical/doctor’s visit, or
             need for urgent care.

     •       Inclement weather affecting the safe transport of participants, emergency evacuations
             such as for hurricanes, disasters, or when the Governor declares weather or other
             emergency.

     •       If an emergency arises where the staff must accompany the participant to receive
             medical attention.

     •       If the ADHC is transporting the participant to a medical appointment, then a four (4)
             hour stay is acceptable.

     These cases must be approved by the CLTC Area Office and will be addressed on a case-by
     case basis upon receipt of a request describing the circumstances. The Area Administrator or
     Designee will enter a narrative note indicating request and/or approval.

    The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in
    Phoenix. The Case Manager will obtain the provider choice(s) from the participant and/or
    Authorized Representative in the order of preference. These choices may be obtained verbally,
    by mail or during an in-home visit. If the choices are made verbally, the choices are
    documented in the narrative in order of preference.

     The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Adult Day Health
     Care.

     Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan (under the
     Complete tab) in Phoenix.


Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 22
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023


    Service Justification: Emphasize socialization needs and/or caregiver relief and/or need for
    supervision, etc.

    The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen providers in order of preference via
    Phoenix.

     If the referral is accepted, the Case Manager notifies the ADHC of the pertinent participant
     information including the contact information for the physician. The ADHC must obtain the
     physician orders for the participant to attend ADHC utilizing the DHHS Adult Day Health
     Care Form 122DC. The ADHC can locate this form in the Phoenix provider portal. Once the
     ADHC has obtained the physician’s order, the ADHC must notify the Case Manager to
     negotiate the start date for services to begin.

     The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of services in
     accordance with the participant’s Service Plan.

     The Service Provision Form must be sent to the provider via Phoenix to initiate services. The
     initial Service Plan and the new Service Plan created following re-evaluation will be available
     to the provider via Phoenix.

    If a participant transfers from one ADHC provider to another, the participant’s existing
    Physician order for ADHC remains effective only if it is current and completed within
    the last two years. The transferring facility will send a copy of the Physician order to the
    accepting facility.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 23
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                    July 1, 2023

                                7B Adult Day Health Care-Nursing

     One (1) unit of service includes any one or more of the allowed ADHC-Nursing Services
     during one (1) day’s attendance at the ADHC.

      This service is provided by a licensed nurse in the ADHC. ADHC-Nursing is limited to the
      following skilled procedures:

     •        Ostomy care

     •        Urinary catheter care

     •        Decubitus ulcer/wound care

     •        Tracheostomy care

     •        Tube feeding

     •        Nebulizer treatment that requires medication

      The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Adult Day Health
      Care-Nursing.

      Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in
      Phoenix.

      Note: An intervention for at least one of the skilled procedures must be included on the
            Service Plan in order to request prior approval.

      Service justification: State skilled procedure(s) that are requested for MD to order. (Note:
      These may differ from what the MD actually orders but allows the referral to go forward.
      Any differences on signed MD Order as shared by ADHC Nurse should be narrated.)

      The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen ADHC provider.

      The ADHC provider must obtain the physician orders utilizing DHHS Form 122DC, prior to
      the initiation of the service, for the participant to receive ADHC Nursing. The ADHC is
      responsible for obtaining the initial order as well as the direct care and ongoing orders
      including changes in frequency. Once the ADHC has obtained the physician’s orders, the
      ADHC must notify the Case Manager to negotiate the start date for services to begin.

      The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of services in
      accordance with the participant’s Service Plan. The authorization is not day specific. There
      is one (1) procedure code for ADHC-Nursing regardless of the procedure to be completed.

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                           Page 24
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                    July 1, 2023

      The authorization should include the number of units per week.

      An authorization change is not necessary for a change in the days of the week the procedure
      will be provided unless a change in the frequency is needed.

      If there is a change in frequency, the ADHC will obtain updated physician’s order and will
      notify the Case Manager. The Case Manager will issue a new Service Provision Form, if
      necessary. For example, the Procedure was ordered to be done two (2) times per week and is
      now needed five (5) times per week.
      If there is a change in the Procedure, the ADHC will notify the Case Manager. The Case
      Manager will document the contact with the provider in the narrative or through the
      Conversation section in Phoenix. The Case Manager will update the Service Plan if
      indicated. A new Service Provision Form is not needed. For example, the participant was
      receiving nebulizer treatments and now urinary catheter care was added. The change would
      require documentation of the contact and an update in the Service Plan but would not require
      a new Service Provision Form.

      The Service Provision Form must be sent to the provider via Phoenix to initiate services. The
      initial Service Plan and the new Service Plan created following re-evaluation will be
      available to the provider via Phoenix.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                           Page 25
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023

                                        7C Attendant Care

    The unit of service is one (1) hour. This service may be authorized in one-half (1/2) hour
    increments after a minimum of one (1) hour.

    The objectives of the Attendant Care Service are to restore, maintain, and promote the health
    status of Medicaid Home and Community Based waiver participants through home support,
    medical monitoring, and assistance with activities of daily living.

    Attendant Care is a service to assist with ADL and IADL care. This service is self-directed by
    the participant or directed by someone who is able and willing to be the Employer of Record
    (EOR) for Attendant services.

    The Attendant must demonstrate an ability to read, write and communicate effectively with the
    Participant and/or their Representative.

    No Physician Order is required for this service.

    Prior Approval is required before sending a referral to UAP. If Attendant Care will replace
    existing agency personal care services, this will be indicated in the prior approval request.

    Service Justification: Include a condition or conditions affecting participant’s ability to
    perform ADL’s and IADL’s. (Examples: Shortness of breath related to COPD; unsteady on
    feet due to diabetic neuropathy; frailty due to advanced age). Include circumstances that may
    indicate need for high or increased service levels, such as recent hospitalization, physical
    decline of participant or caregiver, caregiver’s need for respite, or loss of caregiver. Note: Do
    not include number of hours in the comments on the service plan or desired weekly
    schedule.

   Note: When Attendant Care is replacing existing agency personal care services, the
         authorization for the agency services will remain in effect until the Attendant Care start
         date. The agency personal care services will be terminated effective the day prior to the
         start date of Attendant Care.


   If the Attendant is unable to or fails to check-in or check-out when providing service, the
   Attendant must complete a Resolution Log acknowledging the service was provided and the
   reason for the resolution. Refer to the 12 Strike Policy in Phoenix Help for additional
   requirements.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 26
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023

                Participants must be present while services are being provided.

   Attendant Care activities include:

     a.      Support of activities of daily living, e.g., assistance with bathing, dressing, feeding,
             personal grooming, personal hygiene, transferring and mobility;

     b.      Meal or snack preparation, planning and serving, cleaning up afterwards, following
             specially prescribed diets as necessary and encouraging participants to adhere to any
             specially prescribed diets;

     c.      General housekeeping includes cleaning (such as sweeping, vacuuming, mopping,
             dusting, taking out the trash, changing bed linens, defrosting and cleaning the
             refrigerator, cleaning the stove or oven, cleaning bathrooms) and activities as needed
             to maintain the participant in a safe and sanitary environment. Housekeeping only
             includes areas specific to the participant such as the participant’s bedroom, bathroom,
             etc.

     d.      Shopping assistance, essential errands, and escorting participant to medical services.
             Attendants are not allowed to provide transportation.

     e.      Assistance with communication, which includes, but is not limited to placing a phone
             within participant’s reach and physically assisting participant with the use of the
             phone, and orientation to daily events.

     f.      Monitoring medication, e.g., the type that would consist of informing the participant it
             is time to take medication as prescribed by the physician and as written directions on
             the box or bottle indicate. It does not mean that the attendant is responsible for giving
             the medicine; however, it does not preclude the attendant from handing the medicine
             container or medicines already set up in daily containers to the participant.

     Skilled Services Provided by an Approved Attendant

     The waiver service definition for “Attendant” allows a participant or the designee to self-
     direct “skilled service activities” performed by the Attendant with approval from the
     participant’s physician. These activities are considered “health maintenance activities” which
     could be performed by the participant if the individual were physically and mentally capable.
     With Physician approval, Attendants may provide skilled services which are considered
     health maintenance activities for participants in all Community Long Term Care Home and
     Community Based Services Waivers.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 27
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                   July 1, 2023


     When a referral is being made to UAP for Attendant Care and it is being requested the
     Attendant provide Skilled Service Activities, the Case Manager will include a comment on
     the referral stating “Participant/Authorized Representative has requested a skilled service
     to be provided.”

     For existing referrals, already in process with UAP, where a skilled service need has been
     identified, the Case Manager will note in the comment section on the referral,
     “Participant/Authorized Representative has requested a skilled service to be provided.”
     AND email UAP (UAP@scdhhs.gov) to notify them of the change in the referral. UAP
     will not receive a Phoenix notification that there is a change to the referral.

     UAP will send the “MEDICAID HOME COMMUNITY BASED WAIVERS PHYSICIAN
     STATEMENT FOR PARTICIPANT DIRECTED ATTENDANT CARE” and a copy of the
     legislation to the assigned Case Manager, who will provide the form and a copy of the
     legislation to the Participant or Attendant’s Employer of Record. The Participant or Employer
     of Record or Designee is responsible for obtaining the physician approval/signature.

     Once the signed Physician’s Statement has been received, the Case Manager will scan the
     form into Phoenix scans under the Attendant scan tag and email UAP to notify the form has
     been returned and scanned. UAP will complete the Attendant match visit once this
     notification is received by email.
     The following list of services are examples of activities which may be appropriate for
     the Attendant to perform. This list is not all inclusive.

     •       Tracheostomy care

     •       Ventilator Care - taking on and off the vent

     •       Suctioning- tracheostomy/ oral

     •       Finger stick blood glucose monitoring

     •       Wound care

     •       Enteral feedings (PEG or Nasogastric)

     •       Bowel program

     •       Ostomy care

     •       Catheter care

     Any other skilled service requested by the participant/Employer of Record/Designee or
     physician requires Central Office approval.
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                          Page 28
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                   July 1, 2023


     NOTE: If the participant changes physicians and the physician who signed the Physician
         Statement is no longer involved in the participant’s care, a new Physician’s Statement
         is required. If the service is directed by the Employer of Record (EOR) instead of the
         participant and the Employer of Record is no longer able to direct the skilled service
         activities performed by the Attendant, a new physician statement is required.

 Discussion & Selection of an Employer of Record (EOR) for Attendant Care Services

     If the Case Manager and participant and/or Authorized Representative identify Attendant
     Care as a need, the Case Manager will discuss the need to identify an Employer of Record
     (EOR). For the participant to be approved for Attendant Care services, the participant or
     designee will serve as the Employer of Record (EOR). The EOR for attendant service must
     be knowledgeable and involved in the participant's day to day care.

     The Authorized Representative cannot serve as the Attendant unless there is an
     approved designated Employer of Record (EOR) who assumes the responsibility of all
     attendant care related contacts with the Case Manager.

     The EOR should reside within a 50-mile radius of the participant’s home. Any exceptions
     must be approved by UAP and Waiver Service Exceptions. Waiver Service Exceptions
     requests should be emailed to WES@scdhhs.gov.

     Steps to request an exception for EOR over 50 miles:

     1.      Case Manager narrate the EOR will be over 50 miles away.

     2.      Case Manager confirm and narrate that the EOR is the only person available to perform
             the task and has agreed to do so and that the EOR understands and has agreed to assume
             the roles and responsibilities.

     3.      Documentation must be present that the Area Administrator or Lead Team agrees with
             the justification and gives approval for the request to be sent to Waiver Service
             Exceptions for review.

     The Employer of Record (EOR)

     •       Must be willing and able to interview prospective Attendants;

     •       Meet with UAP in the home for all match visits and when follow-up visits are
             necessary;

     •       Discuss the participant's attendant care needs by telephone with the appropriate CLTC
             staff or Case Manager;

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                          Page 29
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023

     •       Meet with the Case Manager in the participant’s home for the Initial Visit if available;

     •       Meet with the Case Manager in the participant’s home for quarterly visits if available;

     •       Meet with the Case Manager in the participant’s home for annual re-evaluation visits;

     •       Attend the initial Attendant/EOR Care Call training if available.

     •       Must provide regular supervision of the Attendant;

     •       Must provide guidance, direction and assistance with problems related to the
             participant’s care to the Attendant;

     •       Must review and sign the Attendant Logs at least monthly, acknowledging that
             services were or were not provided by the attendant on the days notated on the logs;

     •       Must be present to observe the care provided by the Attendant at least monthly;

     •       Must review and sign the Resolution Form completed by Attendant, acknowledging
             that the service was provided if the Attendant is unable to or fails to check-in or check-
             out on the designated landline phone or Mobile App.

     •       The signed Resolution Log must be received by the CLTC Area Office within
             thirty (30) days of the date of the Attendant Care service or a strike will be
             issued.

     •       The CLTC Area Office Support Staff will work resolutions within 10 business days
             of submission.

     Note: When a vision impaired participant self-directs Attendant Care, UAP initially reads
           related forms to the Participant and instructs Attendants to read the Daily Logs to the
           Participant, prior to signing.


 Referrals to University Affiliated Program (UAP) for Attendant Care

     Once a prospective EOR is identified, and the prospective EOR has identified a prospective
     Attendant, the prospective EOR will discuss the choice of provider with the participant and
     Case Manager. If the Case Manager agrees that this is a reasonable option for participant
     care, the Case Manager will:

     •       Document the choice of provider.

     •       Complete a referral to UAP in Phoenix. Choose “Approval Request” on the carrousel
             to complete the appropriate sections of “Participant Directed Care” or

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                               Page 30
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023

             “Representative Directed Care”. The Case Manager should alert UAP of any
             concerns when sending the form to UAP, such as APS involvement, etc. in the
             comment section.

     •       UAP sends an information packet to the EOR and an enrollment packet to the
             Attendant. An UAP Nurse contacts the participant’s prospective EOR to discuss
             Attendant Care service.

     •       UAP will make arrangements to visit the participant and the prospective EOR &
             Attendant in the participant’s home after the Attendant meets the requirements to
             enroll. Match Visits by UAP must include observation of the ADL care as outlined in
             the service plan.

     •       Upon completion of a match visit, UAP will notify the Case Manager by approving
             the match via Phoenix.

     •       Case Manager will review any comments provided by UAP at the Match Visit.

     •       After receiving notification of approval in Phoenix from UAP, the Case Manager
             will check the resource directory to verify the Attendant’s enrollment and review the
             first and/or second light(s) are green in Phoenix. If enrolled and the appropriate lights
             are green in Phoenix, the Area Office Attendant Care Trainer determines if training
             is necessary. Refer to the CLTC Standardized Attendant Care Training Manual for
             additional guidance.


     Note: If Care Call training has been attended by the chosen provider within the past 6
     months, it is not necessary to repeat the training unless a refresher session is requested.
     Care Call training may need to be repeated if the Attendant has not provided services in
     the last 6 months.

     •       If the Attendant has not been enrolled, an enrollment notification will be sent from
             Central Office when the provider has been enrolled and is in the Resource Directory.

     •       When the provider has been enrolled, Attendant Care Trainer sends an e-mail to
             the Case Manager to notify of the status of the Attendant’s enrollment.

     •       UAP instructs the Attendant to contact the Case Manager to schedule Care Call
             Training after the Attendant receives a provider number.

     •       If Phoenix shows the red stop light under “ok to authorize” Attendant services, do not
             authorize the service. View status screen to determine the enrollment information
             that is missing.

     •       Case Manager reviews the specific attendant information in the Participant’s
             Phoenix case in the Attendant Care Request section.
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 31
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                    July 1, 2023


     •       If Phoenix shows the green light under “ok to authorize” Attendant services, and Care
             Call training is needed; the CLTC Trainer should arrange Attendant/EOR Care Call
             Training.
     •        The Case Manager Authorizes the total number of hours per week. The EOR and
             Attendant will negotiate the appropriate days and times of service to meet the
             participant’s needs as outlined by the Participant’s Service Plan.

     •       The Case Manager reviews the service plan and duties with the Attendant during the
             Care Call Training.

     •      The Case Manager reviews the authorization with the Attendant. Unless otherwise
            approved by the Area Administrator or Lead Team,
     Attendant Care services will be started with the following Sunday’s date. The Service
            Provision Form designates the units per week, not specific days.

     •       The Case Manager provides the attendant with a Service Provision Form.

     •       The Case Manager provides the attendant with a copy of the Service Plan.

 When Attendant Care service is terminated, the Case Manager:

     •       Sends a copy of the service termination form to the Attendant provider.

     •       Contacts the Attendant provider by phone if the termination is effective immediately.

     •       Notifies UAP of the termination of the service.

     •       Updates the Service Plan to reflect the change in service.

     •       Terminates the authorization when/if the attendant is terminated.

     •       Completes a Notice of Discontinued Employment Form and faxes to Financial
             Management Service.

     •       The Notice of Discontinued Employment Form is only to be completed when the
             Attendant is fired and never going to be requested back for employment. A copy of
             the Notice of Discontinued Employment Form should be uploaded in Phoenix and
             narrated when it was sent to Financial Management Service.

 When there is a request to change Attendant Care Provider choice, the Case Manager:

     •       Receives and discusses the selection of the new prospective Attendant with the EOR.

     •       Complete a new pre-screen under the Approval Request tab in Phoenix.

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                           Page 32
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                   July 1, 2023

     •       Awaits UAP approval of the match with the new Attendant in Phoenix.

     •       Works with CLTC staff in Area Office who provide Attendant training to schedule
             training, if needed.

     •       If Phoenix shows the green light under “ok to authorize” Attendant services, and Care
             Call training is needed; the CLTC Trainer should arrange Attendant/EOR Care Call
             Training.

     •       Authorizes the total number of hours per week. The EOR and Attendant will negotiate
             the appropriate days and times of service to meet the participant’s needs as outlined
             by the Participant’s Service Plan.

  When more than one Attendant is authorized for a participant

     When more than one Attendant provides services on a regular basis, all Attendants will be
     authorized the total amount of Attendant Care hours approved to provide services on an
     ongoing basis. A comment is included on the authorization stating the total combined Attendant
     hours cannot exceed the total hours approved. For example: If fifteen (15) units authorized
     between two (2) Attendants and primary Attendant provided twelve (12) hours; this leaves only
     three (3) units for the second (2nd) Attendant. The EOR must closely work with the two (2)
     Attendants regarding the specific times that each will provide service since the total hours
     cannot exceed fifteen (15). The Case Manager must monitor hours closely to ensure the fifteen
     (15) hour total is not exceeded.

     Exception: If both attendants provide a specific number of units each week, the hours can be
                divided and authorized specific to the EOR’s designation of the break-out of
                hours. The comment section will be used to communicate this information to the
                provider.

     If only a one-time/temporary backup Attendant is necessary, the service is authorized at the
     time of the usage. The EOR or Attendant should notify the Case Manager in advance, if
     possible. If the one-time/temporary backup Attendant is necessary when the CLTC Area
     Office is closed and
     unable to provide prior approval, the EOR must call as soon as the CLTC office reopens. The
     authorization must specify the number of hours worked and have a start and end date. The
     primary authorization is left open. The Attendant should check-in and check-out in Care Call.
     It is the Case Manager’s responsibility to assure the approved number of hours are not
     exceeded.

  Case Manager On-going Responsibilities:

             1.   Daily Logs

             •        The Daily Attendant Log is an important documentation tool used by all
                      Attendants to record services provided.
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                          Page 33
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                        July 1, 2023


                       The log is to be completed daily by the Attendant outlining only the specific
                       tasks performed on the noted date as part of the participant’s care. The log is to
                       be signed weekly by the EOR and to be received in the CLTC Area Office that
                       serves the participant by the fifteenth (15th) of the following month. The CLTC
                       Support Staff will receive the attendant logs and securely forward to the
                       assigned Case Manager.

             •        The assigned Case Manager will review all information on the log to ensure
                      that the Attendant Care services notated as provided to the Participant are in
                      compliance with the Participant’s Service Plan and match the Care Call
                      information through Phoenix. The Case Manager should also make sure the
                      logs have the required signature of the Attendant and the EOR and that they
                      are not copies of previously submitted logs. The Case Manager is
                      responsible for uploading the daily logs into Phoenix to the appropriate
                      “Attendant” scan tag.

             •        Receipt and review of the logs, as well as any Attendant comments showing
                      problems or changes in the condition of the participant, should be narrated in
                      Phoenix no later than the twenty-second (22nd) day of the month. The
                      completed logs will be scanned into Phoenix scans under the “Attendant” scan
                      tag. If the logs are not received with appropriate signatures by both the
                      Attendant and Employer of Record by the fifteenth (15th) of the month, the
                      Case Manager will complete and mail a CLTC Notification Form to the
                      Participant/Authorized Representative and EOR no later than the twenty-
                      second (22nd) of that month. The termination date (often (10) business days
                      from the date mailed) and reason for the termination is to be included in the
                      CLTC Notification Form. If the logs are received by the deadline, the Service
                      Provision Form will remain open.

             •        Should the Attendant fail to properly submit the logs within the time frame a
                      second time for the same participant, the Attendant service for that Participant
                      will be terminated and not reinstated for that participant/attendant match. The
                      Case Manager should offer other services to the participant/Authorized
                      Representative to meet the participant’s service needs.

             •        If the logs are not received with proper signature by the end of the ten (10)
                      business day notice, no further extension is required by the Case Manager.
                      The attendant service is immediately terminated.

             •        If the Attendant is serving another participant, and is timely for that
                      Participant, services for the second Participant may continue.

             •        Discrepancies or differences in services provided and those indicated on the
                      service plan, Attendant Care Logs, or in Care Call should be investigated and
                      resolved by the Case Manager.
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                               Page 34
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023


             2.       If participant or EOR is suspected of no longer being capable of supervision,
                      UAP will be informed by the Case Manager.

             3.       If the EOR dies or is no longer able or willing to provide weekly supervision,
                      the Attendant Service must be immediately terminated. In this situation, the
                      participant/Authorized Representative and the Attendant are to be notified by
                      phone of the termination. A copy of the termination form is mailed to the
                      Attendant.

             4.       Any changes in the EOR must be referred as a new match visit to determine
                      the prospective EOR’s ability to direct care and to establish the Attendant as
                      the Employee of the EOR with the fiscal agent.

             5.       Case Manager will notify UAP of any changes in the participant’s condition
                      or situation that may impact the Attendant Care services. (Example: Attendant
                      is no longer providing care to participant).

             6.       The CLTC Area Office Representative will receive written Care Call
                      Resolution Forms and will contact the Case Manager for confirmation that
                      the service was provided. All requests for confirmation of resolutions should
                      be reviewed and investigated, and the Case Manager must respond to the
                      CLTC Area Office Representative for approval/denial within seven (7)
                      business days. Any delay in response back to the CLTC Area Office
                      Representative should be narrated, giving reason for the delay. Prompt action
                      to finalize the resolution is expected.

             7.       If UAP inactivates a match and the attendant is suspended or terminated, UAP
                      will inform the assigned Case Manager. The Case Manager will notify the
                      participant, attendant and EOR of the suspension or termination. The Case
                      Manager will terminate the authorization. UAP will confirm the termination
                      and will contact the Lead Team Case Manager or Area Administrator, if
                      needed.

 Monitoring of Service by UAP

     Problem resolution visits by the UAP Nurse may be requested by the participant, Authorized
     Representative, EOR, Attendant, Case Manager, Lead Team Case Manager or Area
     Administrator. All appropriate parties will be consulted for problem resolution.

     Service level approvals are time limited until the next re-evaluation or as indicated by the
     Reviewer in approval comments.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 35
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023

                                       7D Handheld Shower

  One (1) unit of service includes one Handheld Shower. One unit allowed per year.

  Handheld Shower must be installed/adjusted by the provider. Items may not be dropped shipped
  to the participant.


  The need for this equipment must be evaluated in the home prior to authorizing the service. The
  need for this service must be documented in the Home Assessment section of Phoenix.


  The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix.
  The Case Manager will obtain the provider choice(s) from the participant and/or Authorized
  Representative in order of preference. These choices may be obtained verbally, by mail or during
  an in-home visit. If the choices are made verbally, the choices are documented in the narrative in
  order of preference.

  The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Handheld Shower.

  Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.
  The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen provider in order of preference via Phoenix.

  Service Justification: Handheld Shower: Focus on weakness, poor endurance. Include date
  last item was received.

  No Physician Order is required for this service.

  The Case Manager will authorize the services in accordance with the participant’s Service Plan.
  This Service Provision Form will include a start date and an end date which will be thirty (30) days
  later.

  The Service Provision Form must be sent to the provider via Phoenix to initiate services. The
  Service Plan is not required to be sent to the provider for this service.

  The cost of Handheld Shower is not included in the $7,500.00 lifetime cap for Environmental
  Modification services.

                         CLTC STANDARDS FOR HANDHELD SHOWER

Specs for Handheld Shower:
Minimum 6’ hose Pause/
shut off function
Installation with Teflon tape

 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 36
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                        July 1, 2023


                                      7E Case Management

 Case management is a waiver service that is provided to all participants who participate in the
 CLTC program. It is the process of discussing and coordinating services to enable the participant
 to remain in the home. Case management begins on the date the participant enters the program
 and continues through the date of application closure. It is a vital part of the long-term care service
 system. Some participants may choose and/or need only case management services. In such
 situations, the value of case management is in the continued follow-up, coordination, and
 monitoring of services other than CLTC waiver services. On-going case management enables the
 Case Manager to evaluate changes in the participant’s service needs.

 A unit of service is one (1) month of Case Management.

 The intensity of Case Management services provided to each participant is dependent upon the
 individual participant’s needs as set forth in the participant’s Service Plan.

 The Service Plan will include the Case Management Service.

 Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.
 A written justification reason is not required. Prior approval will be obtained for one (1) unit of
 Case Management monthly.

 At a minimum, case management requires a participant contact monthly. The contact types include
 Initial Visit, Monthly Contact, Quarterly Visit and Re-evaluation Visit. One of these contact types
 must be provided and documented every month.

 A referral is created and sent to the chosen providers in order of preference via Phoenix.

 Service Justification: No justification needed.

 If the referral is accepted, the on-going Case Manager has forty-eight (48) business hours to
 contact the Case Manager II to receive the case. The case will be discussed with the on-going
 Case Manager. The Case Manager II will complete the Service Provision Form for Case
 Management. Documentation of the case referral and acceptance must be made in Phoenix by
 the Case Manager II.

 Case Management Services must be provided Monday through Friday between the hours of
 7:00am- 7:00pm. If the participant and/or Authorized Representative request case management
 contact or visit outside of these hours for the participant’s benefit, approval must be received
 from and narrated in Phoenix by the Area Administrator.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                                Page 37
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                July 1, 2023

   Case Management shall include the following activities:

      A.      Person Centered Service Planning

      B.      Service Coordination

      C.      Monitoring

      D.      Re-evaluation

      E.      Service Plan Evaluation

      F.      Service Counseling

      G.      Initial Authorization of Waiver Service

      H.      Changes in Services within an Authorization Period

      I.      Termination of Waiver Services

      J.      Application or Case Termination and/or Transfer

      K.      Documentation of each activity reflecting date of occurrence.

      Note: Case Management providers should refer to other related chapters as well as the
            requirements of the Community Long Term Care Case Management Contract and
            the Case Management Scope of Services at:

 https://www.scdhhs.gov/provider-type/community-long-term-care-provider-manual-070119-
edition-posted-070119




 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                       Page 38
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023

                                    7F Companion Services

 The unit of service is one (1) hour (not including time for transportation to and from participant’s
 residence, breaks or meals). This service may be authorized in one-half (½) hour increments after
 a minimum of one (1) hour.

 Companion services are provided in the participant’s residence and are intended to provide relief
 for caregivers with needed supervision of participants. The service does not include hands on
 care.

 Participants must be present when this service is being

 provided. Companion activities include:

 1.      Socialization – reading, conversation, assistance with participant’s mail or newspaper;

 2.      Assistance with meal or snack preparations, serving and cleaning up afterwards;

 3.      Incidental housekeeping including sweeping, dusting, assistance with or supervision of
         the participant’s laundry or linens, and other light chores needed to maintain the
         participant in a safe and sanitary environment. Housekeeping is only for the areas specific
         to the participant such as the participant’s bedroom, bathroom, etc.

 4.      Shopping assistance, essential errands, and escorting participant to medical services.
         Companions are not allowed to provide transportation.

 5.      Sitting service focusing on the participant including supervision, orientation, and
         observation for basic safety to include making emergency contact if needed.

 Companion services can be provided by an agency provider or Medicaid enrolled individual
 companion provider.

 A person who is the primary caregiver cannot be paid to provide companion services. A primary
 caregiver is someone who provides hands-on care as a natural support to the participant. There
 could be more than one primary caregiver identified. The reason for this is the service is primarily
 designed to give relief to the primary caregiver(s).

 The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix.
 The Case Manager will obtain the provider choice(s) from the participant and/or Authorized
 Representative in the order of preference. These choices may be obtained verbally, by mail or
 during an in-home visit. If the choices are made verbally, the choices are documented in the
 narrative in order of preference.

 The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Companion Service.

Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 39
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023


   Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.

   Service Justification: Agency or Individual: State type of activity or activities needed, such
   as socialization, supervision, respite for caregiver, essential errands, etc. Note: Do not include
   number of hours, desired time of day, or desired days of week/weekly schedule.

   The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen providers in order of preference via Phoenix.

   If the referral is accepted, the Case Manager will negotiate the start date for services to begin.

   No Physician Order is required.

   The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of services in accordance
   with the participant’s Service Plan.

   The Service Provision Form must be completed. The duties of the Companion- Individual must
   be listed in the Comments section of the Service Provision Form. The Service Provision Form
   must be given to the Companion- Individual by mail or hand delivery.

   The Service Provision Form must be sent to the Companion Agency via Phoenix. The Service
   Plan is available to the provider in Phoenix.

   Service level approvals are time limited until the next re-evaluation or as indicated by the Reviewer
   in approval comments.

Companion Services Provided by Individual Companion Providers

       The Companion Individual Service is authorized by the week.

      If the Case Manager and participant/Authorized Representative identify Companion
      (Individual) as a need, then the Case Manager will:

       •      Complete the Pre-screening in Phoenix for Participant Directed Care (UAP Form 1)
              OR Pre-screening for Assessment for Representative Directed Care (UAP Form 2).

       •      Obtain a Choice of Provider.

       •      Make a referral to UAP if the pre-screening is passed. The referral is made by
              emailing UAP the participant’s name and Client ID.




 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 40
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

     •       UAP conducts the enrollment review process (PPD, SLED check, Fiscal Agent
             paperwork) and notifies the Case Manager of the findings.

     •       UAP notifies the participant and/or Authorized Representative of the SLED check
             results.

     •       If approved by UAP, monitor Phoenix for approval and for the CLTC Central Office
             notification of enrollment.

 The CLTC Area Office Support Staff will:

     •       Check the Resource Directory to verify companion’s enrollment as a provider after
             receiving email from UAP.

     •       Verify if the training box has been completed if the companion is enrolled. If the
             companion has not been enrolled, an enrollment notification will be sent from Central
             Office when the provider has been enrolled and is on the Resource Directory.

     •       Send an email notification to the Case Manager when the companion is enrolled.

 The Case Manager will then review the specific Individual Companion information in the
 Participant’s Phoenix record under the Attendant Care Request section.

     •       If the light under “ok to authorize” for companion services in Phoenix is red, do not
             authorize the individual companion services. View status screen to determine what
             enrollment information is missing.

     •       When the light under “ok to authorize” companion services in Phoenix is green,
             proceed to arrange billing training for the provider in the CLTC Area Office with the
             CLTC Area Office Attendant Care Trainer. During training, the Case Manager to
             review the activities to be performed by the Companion.

             Note: If billing training has already been attended by the chosen provider, it is not
             necessary to repeat the training. The service authorization including the activities to
             be completed in the comments section, may be mailed to the companion provider.

     •       Completes Service Provision Form in Phoenix and sends a copy to the provider and
             UAP.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 41
  SCDHHS
  Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
  Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                  July 1, 2023


      •       The Companion does NOT complete Daily Logs.

      •       Completes a service termination in Phoenix when the service is terminated and sends
              a service termination to the companion provider. Also, UAP must be notified of the
              termination date of the companion service. The Service Plan must be updated
              accordingly.

      •       Completes a Notice of Discontinued Employment Form and faxes to Financial
              Management Services


      After the Companion service starts: The Case Manager should make every effort to
      schedule the next quarterly home visit during a time when the companion provider is
      available. The Case Manager should review the service expectations with the companion
      and participant and/or Authorized Representative and monitor for quality and
      appropriateness.

Companion Services Provided Through an Agency

      The Companion Agency Service is authorized by the day.

      Service Provision Form must be sent to the provider designating the units per day. It is
      important that the Case Manager coordinate this service with other services going into the
      home as well as with the companion’s supervisor.




 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                         Page 42
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                   July 1, 2023


                                    7G Environmental Modifications

 This service must be participant specific and for the benefit of the participant. Environmental
 Modification must be necessary to ensure health, welfare and safety and enable the participant to
 function with greater independence in the home without which, the participant would require
 institutionalization.

 The service must be cost effective. The Case Manager must exercise professional judgment
 regarding the appropriateness of the service. The service is not intended for major home
 improvement, remodeling, or cosmetic improvements. The Case Manager must explore other
 available community resources prior to requesting approval for this service.

 The need for Environmental Modifications including bath safety equipment must be evaluated in
 the home by the Case Manager prior to requesting approval. The need for this service must be
 documented in the Home Assessment section of Phoenix. During the home visit, the Case
 Manager must explain and obtain appropriate signatures on the Participant or Landowner
 Consent Form for all the environmental modification services.

 Exception: Authorization of fans or air conditioners does not require a Participant or Landowner
            Consent Form. A home visit is not required for fans, or air conditioners. A phone
            call will be acceptable for these items only.

 The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Environmental
 Modification.

 Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.
 The service prior approval is required prior to sending the request to the Environmental
 Modification Specialist.

 Note: There is a lifetime cap of $7,500. This includes the costs for ramps and enhanced
       environmental modifications. Requests to exceed this amount must be sent to Central
       Office for consideration and approval.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                          Page 43
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023

                                    7G-1 Fans/Air Conditioners

 One (1) unit of service includes one of the allowed items of Fans or Air Conditioners.

 The need for this equipment can be evaluated and assessed by a phone call. A home visit is not
 required for fans or air conditioners. The need for this service must be documented in the Home
 Assessment section of Phoenix.

 One (1) Fan and one (1) Air Conditioner can be authorized every two (2) years, if needed. No
 exception shall be granted.

 The Participant or Landowner Consent Form is not required for this service.
  The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Fan/Air Conditioner.

 Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.

 Service Justification: Emphasize need based on health and safety related issues. Include date last
 item was received.

 The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix.
 The Case Manager will obtain the provider choice(s) from the participant and/or Authorized
 Representative in order of preference. These choices may be obtained verbally, by mail or during
 an in-home visit. If the choices are made verbally, the choices are documented in the narrative in
 the order of preference.

 The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen providers in order of preference via Phoenix.

 The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of service in accordance
 with the participant Service Plan. This Service Provision Form will include a start date and an
 end date which will be thirty (30) days later.

 The modification specifics must be clearly stated:
 •     Air conditioners must be 10,000 BTU. This unit includes installation and a one-year in-
       home warranty. During this one-year warranty period, it is the responsibility of the
       provider to replace and/or repair the unit. The unit must be present at the home and not
       discarded.

 •       Box fans must have three (3) speeds.


 The Case Manager must verify service and satisfaction with the work completed by the provider,
 as appropriate, on the next scheduled contact after the authorization end date. If there are problems,
 the Case Manager shall negotiate resolution of the problems and/or complaint with the provider.



Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                               Page 44
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023

                                         7G-2 Ramps
 This policy is to be used when a ramp is needed, and no other Environmental Modifications are
 needed.

 The need for this service must be evaluated in the home prior to authorizing the service. The Case
 Manager will visit participant’s home to assess the need for a ramp. This visit may be completed
 at the next regularly scheduled home visit unless there is a critical need requiring an earlier visit.

 Only one ramp may be authorized at a time for a participant. If a participant changes location and
 requests a new ramp or a participant’s current ramp is deemed unsafe, the Case Manager may make
 a home visit to assess need. An additional ramp may be approved if the participant has not exceeded
 the $7500 lifetime cap.

 The need for this service must be documented in the Home Assessment section of Phoenix.

 During the home visit, the Case Manager must explain and obtain appropriate signatures on the
 Participant or Landowner Consent Form. The consent form signature is to be obtained in Phoenix.
 If a hard copy form is used, the signed form must be scanned into Phoenix under the Environmental
 Modification Scan Tag.

 The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix.
 The Case Manager will obtain provider choice(s) from the participant and/or Authorized
 Representative in order of preference. These choices may be obtained verbally, by mail or during
 an in-home visit. If the choices are made verbally, the Case Manager will document the choices
 in the narrative, in the order of preference. The participant and/or Authorized Representative
 should be encouraged to contact chosen provider(s) to determine if the provider is willing to
 accept the referral and to determine how long it will take the provider to complete the work.
 Under no circumstances shall a Case Manager assist the participant in choosing a provider.

 The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for a ramp.

 Prior approval must be requested via the “New Ramp Request” section from the Home
 Assessment screen in Phoenix. Answering the ramp request questions in Phoenix regarding the
 door, yard size, and home elevation will determine whether the ramp request is referred to the
 Ramp Provider or Environmental Modification Specialist.

 Prior to submitting pictures in the Phoenix ramp workflow, make sure of the following:

 •       Pictures need to be at a wide angle to show where the new ramp will need to be placed.

 •       Take the pictures from the street and include the house and yard in the pictures. Pictures
         that are taken too close to the house are not acceptable.

 •       Include multiple angles of the new ramp location in the pictures.
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                               Page 45
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023



 When taking threshold measurements, measure in inches from the door threshold to the
 landing. This is usually only 1”-3” to the outside structure (landing, porch, steps).
 Measurements from the door threshold to the ground are not acceptable.
 Refer to the Ramp Referrals – Case Manager guidance in Phoenix Help for more information.

 Service Justification: State need based on mobility, accessibility, and/or health and safety issues.
 State Participant or Landowner Consent Form was signed, and the document is in Forms or has
 been scanned. If ramp was provided at a previous address, include date. Include amount currently
 spent to date towards lifetime cap.

 The Case Manager will complete the ramp form in the Home Assessment section in Phoenix.
 Click on “Refer to Providers”. Notate if the Environmental Modifications Specialist should
 review “difficult situation” such as homes that are elevated and high off the ground, homes with
 small yards and when there is a discrepancy about which door is to be used.

 The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen provider in the order of preferences via
 Phoenix.

 Note: Do not put an end date on this referral. Send the referral from the Home Assessment section
       in Phoenix. Complete all fields of the referral.


 When the referral is accepted, the Case Manager will receive notification in the Notification
 section in Phoenix. No further action is needed by the Case Manager until the provider submits
 the Ramp Completion Form via Phoenix.

 When the ramp is completed, the provider must submit the Ramp Completion Form in Phoenix.
 Upon notification of receipt of the Ramp Notification Form via Phoenix, the Case Manager must
 complete the Service Provision Form. The start date is the date the Service Provision Form is
 created, and the end date is thirty (30) days later. The dollar amount to be entered on the Service
 Provision Form is the dollar amount indicated by the provider via the Ramp Completion Form.

 If a ramp and an Enhanced Environmental Modification are being requested at the same time for
 the same participant, see Chapter 7, Section 7H-4.

 If the participant and/or Authorized Representative is dissatisfied or complains about the ramp
 and an inspection by the Environmental Modification Specialist is needed, the Case Manager
 will email EVIR to request an inspection. The Case Manager will proceed with creating and
 sending the Service Provision Form to the provider while the Environmental Modification
 Specialist is reviewing the complaint. Provider payment should not be delayed pending
 review by the Environmental Modification Specialist.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 46
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023

 All charges in the “other” category must be pre-approved by the Environmental Modification
 Specialist.

 It is the responsibility of the provider to construct all jobs to the required code of the Americans
 with Disabilities Act (ADA), as well as meeting specific requirements stipulated by CLTC. In
 addition, all required permits are the responsibility of the provider.

 Participants are responsible for ramp maintenance. The Case Manager may request ramp
 inspection by the Environmental Modification Specialist if a ramp is deemed unsafe or the structure
 is compromised. The Environmental Modification Specialist will determine whether or not to
 approve ramp repair or replacement.

 The cost of Ramps service is included in the $7,500.00 lifetime cap for Environmental
 Modification services.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 47
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                    July 1, 2023


                          7G-3 Enhanced Environmental Modifications

 Enhanced Environmental Modifications needs may be requested for participants who own their
 own home/property, or the home is owned by a family member where no rent is paid to the family
 member. Rent to own is considered renting and requires documentation.

 The need for this service must be evaluated in the home prior to authorizing the service. The Case
 Manager will visit participant’s home to assess the need for the Enhanced Environmental
 Modifications. The need for this service must be documented in the Home Assessment section
 of Phoenix.

 During the home visit, the Case Manager must explain and obtain appropriate signatures on the
 Participant or Landowner Consent Form.

 Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.
 The service prior approval is required prior to sending the request to the Environmental
 Modification Specialist.

 Service Justification: State need based on mobility, accessibility, and/or health and safety
 issues. State Participant or Landowner Consent Form was signed, and the document is in Forms
 or has been scanned. Include amount currently spent to date towards lifetime cap.

 The Case Manager will complete the Environmental Needs Tab of the Home Assessment section
 in Phoenix. The Case Manager will indicate the type of Enhanced Environmental Modification
 needed from the list in Phoenix and will send the request to the Environmental Modification
 Specialist via Phoenix.

 The Environmental Modification Specialist will assess the request and indicate via Phoenix when
 the request is ready for bidding.

 The providers serving the geographical area of the participant will receive an email and a Phoenix
 Notification inviting them to bid on the Enhanced Environmental Modification. Providers will
 have access to details of the job including location and pictures in Phoenix.

 Note: If the Environmental Modification Specialist specifies other waiver services to be provided
 by the environmental modification provider in the bid, the provider will not include the cost of
 these items in the bid amount. The Case Manager will create separate Service Provision Forms
 for each waiver service. For example, the environmental modification specialist may indicate in
 the bid proposal that the provider will provide a shower chair. The provider will not include the
 cost of the shower chair in the bid amount. The Case Manager will create separate
 authorizations for the environmental modification and the shower chair.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                           Page 48
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                   July 1, 2023

 Once the bid period is closed, the Environmental Modification Specialist will award the job by
 notifying the winning bidder. The Case Manager will be notified via Phoenix Notifications.

 The Enhanced Environmental Modification provider indicates via Phoenix that the Enhanced
 Environmental Modification project has been completed. The Case Manager will be notified of
 the awarded bid dollar amount and the provider information upon the project completion. The
 Case Manager will be able to see this information both at the point of bid award and at the point
 of job completion. The Case Manager must click on the notification to see the Enhanced
 Environmental Modification project screen where the awarded bid dollar amount is shown. The
 Case Manager will click “Create Authorization.”

 The Case Manager will create a Service Provision Form via Phoenix. The start date will be the
 date the Service Provision Form is created, and the end date will be thirty (30) days later.

 The Enhanced Environmental Modification provider will bill through Care Call.

 If the participant and/or Authorized Representative is dissatisfied or complains about the
 Enhanced Environmental Modification and an inspection by the Environmental Modification
 Specialist is needed, the Case Manager will email EVIR to request an inspection. The Case
 Manager will proceed with creating and sending the Service Provision Specialist Form to the
 provider while the Environmental Modification Specialist is reviewing the complaint. Provider
 payment should not be delayed pending review by the Environmental Modification
 Specialist.

 The cost of Enhanced Environmental Modifications service is included in the $7,500.00 lifetime
 cap for Environmental Modification services.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                          Page 49
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                   July 1, 2023

                  7G-4 Enhanced Environmental Modifications and a Ramp

 Enhanced Environmental Modification may be requested for participants who:

 •       Own their own home/property or

 •       Live in a home which is owned by a family member where no rent is paid.

 •       Rental property can have a ramp, with landowner consent.

 Assessment of Need

 The Case Manager will visit participant’s home to assess the need for Enhanced Environmental
 Modification and ramp.

 This may be completed at the next regularly scheduled home visit. If there is an immediate need,
 the Case Manager will complete an in-home visit as soon as possible.

 During the home visit, the Case Manager must explain and obtain appropriate signatures on the
 Participant Homeowner/Family Member Homeowner Consent Form.

 The need for this service must be documented in the Home Assessment section of Phoenix.

 Prior Approval

 Prior approval for the environmental modification and the ramp must be requested separately in
 the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix. Prior approval is required prior to
 sending the request to the Environmental Modification Specialist.

 Environmental Modification Specialist

 The Case Manager will:

 •       Complete the Environmental Needs Tab of the Home Assessment section in Phoenix.

 •       Complete the ramp form in the Home Assessment section in Phoenix.

 •       Indicate the type of Enhanced Environmental Modification needed from the list in Phoenix.

 •       Send the request to the Environmental Modification Specialist via Phoenix.

 •       Wait for a response from the Environmental Modification Specialist through Phoenix
         before proceeding.


Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                          Page 50
    SCDHHS
    Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
    Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                    July 1, 2023


    The Environmental Modification Specialist will assess the request and indicate via Phoenix
    when the request is ready for bidding.

    Note: If there is a critical need for the ramp and the participant cannot wait for the bid
    process for the Enhanced Environmental Modification, the Case Manager will authorize
    the ramp in accordance with the participant’s choice of provider and follow the process for
    the ramp service. Enhanced Environmental Modifications and the ramp can be provided
    by two different providers of choice. Both services do not have to be provided by the same
    provider.

Environmental Modification Provider Bidding Process

The providers serving the geographical area of the participant will:

•        Receive email and Phoenix notification inviting them to bid on the enhanced environmental
         modification.

•        Access to details of the job including location and pictures in Phoenix.

•        Submit a bid via Phoenix within one week.

Once the bid period is closed, the Environmental Modification Specialist will award the job by
notifying the winning bidder. The Case Manager will be notified via Phoenix Notifications.

The Case Manager must click on the notification to see the Enhanced Environmental Modification
project screen where the awarded bid dollar amount is shown.

    •      If the bid indicates the winning environmental modification provider must build the
           ramp, the Case Manager will send a ramp referral to the winning environmental
           modification provider.

    •      If the bid does not indicate the winning environmental modification provider must
           build the ramp, the Case Manager will send a ramp referral to the ramp providers of
           participant’s choice, in the order of preference.

Service Authorization for Environmental Modification

The Enhanced Environmental Modification Provider indicates via Phoenix when the project(s)
is completed.

The Case Manager will:

•        Click on the notification to see the Enhanced Environmental Modification project screen
         where the awarded bid dollar amount is shown.

 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 51
    SCDHHS
    Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
    Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                  July 1, 2023

•        Click “Create Authorization.”

       oCreate a Service Provision Form for the environmental modification. The start date will
         be the date of the Service Provision Form is created and the end date will be thirty (30)
         days later.
Service Authorization for Ramp

When the ramp is completed, the provider must submit the Ramp Completion Form in Phoenix.

If there are any additional items listed on the Ramp Completion Form under “other” column, the
Ramp Completion Form will be sent to the Environmental Modification Specialist in Phoenix first
for approval before going to the Case Manager for the authorization process.

The Case Manager will:

•        Click on the notification of receipt of the Ramp Completion Form via Phoenix,

•        Click “Create Authorization”

         o    Complete a Service Provision Form for the ramp. The start date is the date the Service
              Provision Form is created, and the end date is thirty (30) days later.

         o    The dollar amount of the Service Provision Form is the amount indicated by the
              provider via the Ramp Completion Form.

The provider will bill through Care Call.

The cost of Enhanced Environmental Modifications and a Ramp service is included in the
$7,500.00 lifetime cap for Environmental Modification services. (The lifetime cap is $6,000.00 for
environmental modifications).




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 52
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                    July 1, 2023

                                    7HAdvanced Pest Control

If there is a known or suspected active bedbug infestation at the time of a scheduled visit,
including the initial assessment and initial visit, the Nurse Consultant or Case Manager
may request Area Administrator approval to complete the visit outside the home. This
approval must be documented in the participant’s narrative. In rare cases, the Case
Manager’s cell phone may be used as a last resort to check in and out of the visit is the
mobile app is unavailable.

A unit of service is one (1).

Advanced Pest Control service is exclusively for the treatment of bed bug infestation.

Advanced Pest Control cannot be authorized for a participant residing in an apartment
complex, boarding house, or Community Residential Care Facility (CRCF). However,
authorization may be considered for a participant residing in a single dwelling rental house or a
duplex dwelling rental house that is not managed by a governmental entity such as the Housing
Authority.

In the case of a rental single house or rental duplex and the landlord does not provide Advanced
Pest Control (bed bug infestation treatment) the Case Manager must obtain permission from the
participant and/or Authorized Representative to speak to the landlord about Advanced Pest Control
treatment.

If the participant and/or Authorized Representative refuses to allow the Case Manager to contact
the landlord, the Case Manger will deny the Advanced Pest Control request. This information
must be clearly documented in the narrative including the participant and/or Authorized
Representative’s permission to contact the landlord, the landlord’s full name, the contact with the
landlord and the landlord’s response. A CLTC Notification Form will be sent stating the reason
the service is denied. An Appeals Notice will not be included when the service is denied for this
reason.

If the landlord refuses to provide the Advanced Pest Control for the participant, the Case Manager
will proceed with the approval and authorization process.

If the landlord refuses to allow Advanced Pest Control treatment to be provided, Advanced Pest
Control should not be authorized, and the Case Manager will send CLTC Notification Form stating
the reason the service is denied. An Appeals Notice will not be included when the service is denied
for this reason.

The need for Advanced Pest Control must be documented in the Home Assessment section in
Phoenix.

The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Advanced Pest Control.


Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                           Page 53
    SCDHHS
    Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
    Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                July 1, 2023


The Case Manager requests initial approval in the Prior Approval section of the Service Plan. The
CLTC Area Administrator/Lead Team (or MMP Care Coordinator for MMP participants) approves
the initial request to allow the case manager to make referral to chosen provider.

The Case Manager explains to the participant and/or Authorized Representative that if a Pest
Control provider is already in place and if that Pest Control provider is also an Advanced Pest
Control provider, the same provider will provide the Advanced Pest Control (bedbug infestation
treatment) if the treatment is approved.

If the participant does not currently receive Pest Control service or the current Pest Control
provider does not also provide Advanced Pest Control, the Case Manager will create the Service
Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix. The Case Manager will obtain the provider
choice(s) from the participant and/or Authorized Representative in order of preference. The
choices may be obtained verbally, by mail or during an in-home visit. If the choices are made
verbally, the choices are documented in the narrative in order of preference. The Case Manager
will create a referral to the chosen providers for Advanced Pest Control in order of preference in
Phoenix.

NOTE: The Case Manager will not create the service authorization until the Area Office
Designee has approved the request and the provider has confirmed bedbug eradication.

The Advanced Pest Control provider visits the participant’s home to verify bed bug infestation. If
bedbug infestation is confirmed, Advanced Pest Control provider enters the following
information into Phoenix:

•        Confirms bedbug infestation;

•        Informs the specific type of treatment to be used;

•        Provides photo or photos of bedbugs found;

•        States the total cost of treatment;

•        Describes the steps that must be taken by the participant in preparation for successful
         treatment;
•        Describes the likelihood of successful eradication;

•        Agrees to provide fitted mattress covers for affected areas;

•        Provides a one-year written warranty of service.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                          Page 54
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

When the Advanced Pest Control provider provides all of the above required documentation, the
Area Office Administrator will verify the bid is less than $1,000 and the warranty is included, then
will approve or deny the request in Phoenix. :

        •   Case manager follows up with the provider and verifies the home is ready for treatment.

        •   Discusses the option of authorizing Personal Care services with the participant and/or
            Authorized Representative if help is needed to prepare the home for successful
            treatment.

        •   Send CLTC Notification Form to the participant, including the Appeals Notice, if the
            service is denied.

        •   The service provision form for Advanced Pest Control will be completed in
            Phoenix when notification is received from the Advanced Pest Control Provider
            that bedbugs have been eradicated. The start date is the date the notification of
            completed treatment and eradication and the end date is thirty (30) days from the start
            date. The dollar amount entered is the dollar amount that was approved by Area Office
            Administrator.
The cost of Advanced Pest Control is $1,000 and is not included in the $7,500 lifetime cap for
Environmental Modification Service.

Advanced Pest Control may only be authorized once in a lifetime. If a re-infestation occurs and is
impacting the health, safety and welfare of a participant, then a request for exception may be sent to
the Waiver Exceptions Group at WES@scdhhs.gov for consideration. The Case Manager must
document the Waiver Exception denial/approval in the narrative once received.

The Advanced Pest Control provider must return to the home and provide re-treatment as necessary
within the one (1) year warranty timeframe which begins on the start date of the authorization.

When re-treatment is necessary, the Case Manager will complete the additional follow-up tab for
documentation in Phoenix. The Advanced Pest Control provider will document subsequent
treatment in Phoenix.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 55
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023


                                     7I Home Delivered Meals

A unit of service is one (1) meal delivered to a participant’s residence. Each meal provides a
minimum of one-third the current recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for the age group as
adopted by the United States Department of Agriculture.

A maximum of 14 meals may be authorized per week (2 meals/ day), according to the participant’s
needs. If the participant attends Adult Day Health Care, a meal should not be provided while the
participant is at the facility. For example, if the participant attends daycare 3 days per week, he/she
will only be authorized 11 meals per week. 14 maximum per week – 3 meals provided at daycare
= 11 meals may be authorized.

The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix.
The Case Manager will obtain the provider choice(s) from the participant and/or Authorized
Representative in the order of preference. The choice may be obtained verbally, by mail or during
an in-home visit. The choices will be documented in the narrative in order of preference.

The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Home Delivered Meals.

Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.

Service Justification: Focus on nutritional needs and/or inability to afford nutritional foods and/or
inability to physically prepare a meal, etc.

The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen providers in order of preference via Phoenix.

No Physician’s Order is required for this service.

When the referral is accepted, the Case Manager will create the Service Provision Form.

The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of the services in
accordance with the participant’s Service Plan. The start date for this service will be Sunday.

The Service Provision Form must be sent to the provider via Phoenix to initiate services. This
service does not require a Service Plan be sent to the provider.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                               Page 56
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023


                                    7J Nutritional Supplements


A unit of service is one (1) case of Nutritional Supplements per month.

Waiver participants who have a need for nutritional supplements, may be authorized for up to two
(2) cases per month. Two cases per month is the maximum amount allowed. No exceptions may
be made.

The Nutritional Supplement must contain at least two hundred twenty (220) calories per two hundred
fifty (250) milliliters.

The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Nutritional Supplements.

Prior approval must be requested and approved via the service request section of the Service Plan
in Phoenix.

NOTE: Prescriber’s Order Form is to be obtained PRIOR to submitting prior approval.

Service Justification: State that Prescriber’s Order Form was received and scanned in Phoenix.

A Physician’s Order is required for this service. The SCDHHS Prescriber’s Order Form must be
completed by the participant’s physician in order for this service to be authorized. Order must be
signed by a primary authorized healthcare provider. Note: Physician Assistant and Nurse
Practitioner signatures ARE acceptable.

The primary authorized healthcare provider must indicate the needs for the supplement and indicate
at least one of the qualifying conditions:

1.      Wasting (loss of ten percent (10%)) body mass in the last sixty (60) days.

2.      Severe dental or gum problems that prevent the participant from chewing.

3.      Has a condition that requires a protein supplement.

4.      Has a swallowing problem that prevents the participant from achieving adequate weight.

5.      Due to a medical condition, the participant cannot maintain adequate weight.

If it is determined that a participant does not meet the criteria for Nutritional Supplements but needs
the service, a request for an exception may be sent to the Central Office Waiver Exceptions Group
at WES@scdhhs.gov for review.

The Case Manager must document the Waiver Exception denial/approval in the narrative once
received.
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                               Page 57
    SCDHHS
    Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
    Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                 July 1, 2023


Note: If an exception needs to be approved by the Central Office Waiver Exceptions Group, the
     Area Office reviewer will review the request and enter a comment regarding the service
     justification in the comment section. The assigned Case Manager will send an email
     requesting the Central Office Waiver Exceptions Group to review the approval request.
     Once a response is received from the Waiver Exceptions Group, the Case Manager must
     document the exception approval/denial in a narrative.

When the Central Office Waiver Exceptions Group has granted an exception for Nutritional
Supplements, an additional review is not required by Central Office upon re-evaluation if the
following conditions are met:

•        The original Central Office approval was not time limited.

•        There is no change in the condition(s) which justified the need for the original exception
         approval.

•        There has been no change in the participant’s level of care.

If the participant is receiving tube feedings, Nutritional Supplements may not be authorized.
Tube feeding supplies should be obtained through Medicaid State Health Plan. Any
exceptions to this must be approved by Central Office.

The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (provider choice form) in Phoenix.
The Case Manager will obtain the provider choice(s) from the participant and/or Authorized
Representative in the order of preference. The choice may be obtained verbally, by mail or during
an in-home visit. The choices will be documented in the narrative in order of preference.

The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen provider in order of preference in Phoenix.

The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of the service in accordance
with the participant’s service plan. The completed Prescriber’s Order Form must be scanned into
Phoenix Scans prior to creating the service provision form for this service.

The Service Provision Form must be sent to the provider via Phoenix to initiate service. A copy of
the signed Prescriber’s Order Form must be faxed or mailed to the provider.

This service does not require a Service Plan be sent to the provider.

A new Prescriber’s Order Form is not required at the re-evaluation. However, if the participant’s
condition changes and the change impacts the need for Nutritional Supplement (type), a new
Prescriber’s Order Form must be obtained.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                           Page 58
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                  July 1, 2023

If the participant’s waiver application is terminated and then re-enrolled and the need for
Nutritional Supplements continues, a new Prescriber’s Order Form must be obtained. If the service
for Nutritional Supplements is terminated for any reason, a new Prescriber’s Order Form must be
obtained to re-start the service.

There are two types of nutritional supplements that can be authorized:

1.     Diabetic nutritional Supplements

2.     Regular Nutritional Supplements case.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                         Page 59
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023




                                    7K Personal Care Services

    A unit of service is one (1) hour. This service can be authorized in one-half (1/2) hour in
    increments above a one (1) hour minimum.

    Personal Care Servicesservice is provided in the participant residence (except when shopping,
    laundry service, etc. must be done off-site or escort services are provided.)

   Personal Care Servicesis not allowed to provide any skilled service at any time under any
   circumstances.

    The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Personal Care Services.

    Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.

    Service Justification: Include a condition or conditions affecting participant’s ability to
    perform ADL’s and/or IADL’s. (Examples:Gait disturbance related to Parkinson’s Disease;
    poor balance and fall risk due to vertigo; assistance with housekeeping and chores due to
    chronic pain from spinal stenosis; tires easily due to CHF; poor fine motor skills caused by
    rheumatoid arthritis). Include circumstances that may indicate need for high or increased
    service levels, such as recent hospitalization, physical decline of participant or caregiver,
    caregiver’s need forassistance with care, or loss of caregiver. Note: Do not include number
    of hours, desired time of day, or desired days of week.

    No Physician’s Order is required for this service.

   The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in
   Phoenix. The Case Manager will obtain the provider choices from the participant and/or
   Authorized Representative in the order of preference. The choices may be obtained verbally,
   by mail, or during an in-home visit. The choices will be documented in the narrative in order of
   preference.

   The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen provider in order of preference in
   Phoenix.

    The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of the service in
    accordance with the participant’s Service Plan.

    The authorization for this service is specific. The PCPC service authorization must be specific
    regarding the preferred time of day – morning, afternoon, or evening - that the service is need.
    These times are defined as:

    Morning 3:00 am – 12:00 noon
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 60
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

    Afternoon 12:01pm – 6:00 pm
    Evening 6:01pm – 2:59 am

    The time of day is negotiated with the provider and participant as necessary and the agreed
    upon time of day must be indicated on the Service Provision Form. The specific time of day
    for the service (such as 10:00am to 12:00pm) should appear on the Service Provision Form
    ONLY if it is essential in meeting the participant’s service needs.

    If the participant receives the service more than one (1) time per day, each appropriate time
    should be indicated on the Service Provision Form and a comment must be made in the
    comment section. The participant whose needs are such that the absence of the Personal Care
    Serviceswould have a substantial impact on the participant’s health and safety is identified as
    being “At Risk for Missed PC Visit.” The Case Manager must discuss any special needs or
    preferences of the participant with the PC provider prior to authorization. In these cases, the
    Service Provision Form will state that the participant is “At Risk for Missed PC Visit.”

    It is acceptable to authorize Personal Care Services service for a participant on the date of
    admission to or discharge from an institutional such as a hospital, nursing home, rehabilitation
    center, or psychiatry facility. The record must clearly document the need for such service.

    The Service Provision Form must be sent to the provider via Phoenix to initiate service. The
    initial Service Plan and the new Service Plan created following re-evaluation will be available
    to the provider via Phoenix. If a revision is made to the Service Plan that affects the
    provider’s service delivery, the provider must be notified of the change via phone or
    conversation feature.

   Service level approvals are time limited until the next re-evaluation or as indicated by the
   Reviewer in approval comments.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 61
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                       July 1, 2023


                            7L Personal Emergency Response System

A unit of service is one (1) month.

A Personal Emergency Response System (PERS) is an electronic device which enables a
participant to secure help in the event of an emergency.

PERS may be authorized for those participants with an identified need who lives alone or who are
alone for a substantial period of time. A substantial period of time is defined as being alone six
(6) or more consecutive hours three (3) or more days per week. Any deviation from these criteria
requires Central Office Designee approval.

The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Personal Emergency
Response System.

Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.

Service Justification: State that participant lives alone or is alone at least six or more consecutive
hours on three or more days per week.

The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix.
The Case Manager will obtain the provider choices(s) from the participant and/or Authorized
Representative in the order of preferences. The choices may be obtained verbally, by mail, or
during an in-home visit. The choices will be documented in the narrative in order of preference.

The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen provider for PERS installation and PERS
on going in order of preference in Phoenix.

The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of the service in accordance
with the participant’s Service Plan.

The PERS Installation Service Provision Form will be completed with a start date and an end date.
The start date and the end date for PERS installation authorization must be in the same month. The
Case Manager should negotiate with the provider to make sure the installation occurs within the
same month. Depending on the time of the month when prior approval is given for the service, the
provider may not be able to install the PERS during the current month. In this case, authorization
would need to be completed for the next month. The Service Plan is not sent to the provider for
this service.

The PERS on-going Service Provision Form start date will be the same day as the PERS installment
start date and will not have an end date.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                              Page 62
    SCDHHS
    Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
    Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                 July 1, 2023




If it is determined that a participant does not meet the criteria for Personal Emergency Response
System but needs the service, a request for an exception may be sent to the Central Office Waiver
Service Exceptions email group at WES@scdhhs.gov for review.


Note: If an exception needs to be approved by Central Office, the Area Office reviewer will
      review the request and enter a comment regarding the service justification in the comment
      section. The assigned Case Manager will send an email to the Waiver Exceptions Group
      requesting review and approval of the exceptions request. The Case Manager must
      document the Waiver Exception denial/approval in the narrative once received.

When Central Office has granted an exception for Personal Emergency Response System, an
additional review is not required by Central Office upon re-evaluation if the following conditions
are met:

•        The original Central Office approval was not time limited.

•        There is no change in the condition(s) which justified the need for the original exception
         approval.

•        There has been no change in the participant’s level of care.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                           Page 63
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023




                                        7M Pest Control

A unit of service is one (1) every other month.

Pest Control cannot be authorized for a participant residing in an apartment complex or a Community
Residential Care Facility (CRCF). However, authorization may be considered for a participant
residing in a single dwelling rental house or a duplex dwelling rental house that is not managed by
a governmental entity such as the Housing Authority.

In the case of a rental single house, rental duplex, boarding house or room rental and the landlord
does not provide Pest Control, the Case Manager must obtain permission from the participant
and/or Authorized Representative to speak to the landlord about Pest Control treatment. If the
participant and/or Authorized Representative refuses to allow the Case Manager to contact the
landlord, the Case Manager will deny the Pest Control request. A CLTC Notification Form will
be sent stating the reason the service is denied. An Appeals Notice will not be included when the
service is denied for this reason. The participant’s permission to contact the landlord and the
discussion with the landlord must be clearly documented in the narrative. This documentation is
to include the full name, the contact with the landlord and the landlord’s response.

If the landlord refuses to provide the Pest Control for the participant, the Case Manager will
proceed with the approval and authorization process.

If the landlord refuses to allow Pest Control to be provided, Pest Control should not be authorized,
and the Case Manager will send CLTC Notification Form stating the reason the service is denied.
An Appeals Notice will not be sent when the service is denied for this reason.

The need for Pest Control must be documented in the Home Assessment section in Phoenix.

Pest control service does not cover the removal of snakes, termites, or rodents.

The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Pest Control.

Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.

Service Justification: Specify type of pest. Include home ownership status. If renting, state
landlord was contacted and will not provide -- but will allow – treatment.

The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix.
The Case Manager will obtain the provider choices from the participant and/or Authorized
Representative in the order of preference. The choices may be obtained verbally, by mail or during
and in-home visit. The choices will be documented in the narrative in order of preference.

The Case Manager will create a referral to the chosen providers for Pest Control in order of
Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 64
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

preference in Phoenix.

The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of the service in accordance
with the participant’s service plan.

The Service Provision Form must be sent to the provider via Phoenix to initiate the service. This
authorization will be completed with a start date and will not have an end date.

Exception:     If a one (1) time treatment is authorized the Case Manager will indicate a start date
               and an end date.

A maximum of six (6) treatments can be authorized within a twelve (12) month period, no
exceptions will be granted. Pest Control may be authorized with a frequency of every other month
at a maximum. Pest Control treatment must be completed by the provider within fourteen (14)
calendar days of the acceptance of the authorization. This service does not require a Service Plan
be sent to the provider.

In the event more than one participant resides in the same residence, Pest Control must only
be authorized for one of the participants.

The cost of Pest Control service is not included in the $7500.00 lifetime cap for Environmental
Modification services.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 65
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023


                       7N Respite - Community Residential Care Facility

A unit of service is a patient day. A patient day is defined as a twenty-four (24) hour period
including the day of admission and excluding the day of discharge. A participant may use twenty-
eight (28) days of respite-Community Residential Care Facility per fiscal year July 1st through June
30th.

Participants may receive respite services in Community Residential Care Facilities (CRCFs) that
are enrolled with SCDHHS as respite providers.

Participants not eligible for respite in the CRCF:

1.     Participants who are dependent on oxygen or mechanical ventilation.

2.     Participants who require tube feedings.

3.     Participants who are diagnosed with dementia and have a history of wandering, unless prior
       approved by Central Office.

4.     Participants who are at skilled level of care, unless prior approved by Central Office.

The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Community Residential
Care Facility Respite.

Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan.

Service Justification: State reason needed (family’s vacation, caregiver hospitalization, etc.).
Include the number of days and type of respite already used during that fiscal year.

The Case Manager will contact the participant’s choice of provider for availability on requested
dates.

A Physician’s Order is required for this service.

The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix.
The Case Manager will obtain the provider choice(s) from the participant and/or Authorized
Representative in the order of preference. The choices may be obtained verbally, by mail, or during
an in-home visit. If the choices are made verbally, the choices are documented in the narrative in
the order of preference.

A 2-step PPD is required prior to authorization of the service. The first step of the PPD must be
completed prior to admission and the second step may be completed after admission.



Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 66
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023


The Case Manager must obtain the completed Respite Form, which includes the participant’s
medical history, physical examination report and Physician’s Order. The Respite Form must be
completed no more than thirty (30) days prior to respite admission date.

Note: If it is not possible to obtain the Respite Form prior to admission, the provider may accept
       the medical information from the CLTC Assessment in lieu of the Respite Form. In such
       cases, the provider must obtain the Respite Form within forty-eight (48) hours of the respite
       admission.

The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of the services in
accordance with the participant’s Service Plan.

The authorization for this service is day specific. The start date is the date of admission and the
end date is the day before the discharge date. The comment section of the authorization should
specify the number of days the participant will be in respite as well as the discharge date.

The Service Provision Form must be completed and sent to the provider along with the Service
Plan and Respite Form via fax or mail.

The reimbursement will include all those items and supplies associated with patient care except
prescribed medications and personal items. These items cannot be billed by the provider to
Medicaid or the participant.

Examples of items to be supplied by the provider include Durable Medical Equipment,
nonprescription medications, med pads, suctioning equipment and supplies, tube feeding
equipment and feeding supplies, dressing change supplies, ostomy supplies, catheters, and
tracheostomy supplies.

Participant and/or Authorized Representative will be responsible for supplying prescribed
medications and personal care items such as soap, mouthwash, deodorant, shampoo, and clothing
during the participant’s respite stay.

Participants are allowed a total of twenty-eight (28) days of Community Residential Care
Facility Respite during a fiscal year, but no more than fourteen (14) of those days can be
respite in a nursing home or hospital during a fiscal year.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 67
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                    July 1, 2023

                  7O Respite Care - Institutional (Nursing Home or Hospital)

A unit of service is a patient day. A patient day is defined as a twenty-four (24) hour period
including the day of admission and excluding the day of discharge. A participant may use fourteen
(14) days of Respite-Institutional (Nursing Home or hospital) per fiscal year July 1st through June
30th.

Participants may receive respite services in nursing homes or hospitals that are enrolled with
SCDHHS as respite providers.

The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for Respite Care-Institutional.

Prior approval must be requested via the service request section in the Service Plan in Phoenix.

Service Justification: State reason needed (family’s vacation, caregiver hospitalization, etc.).
Include the number of days and type of respite already used during that fiscal year.

A Physician’s Order is required for this service.

The Case Manager will create the Service Provider Report (Provider Choice Form) in Phoenix.
The Case Manager will obtain the provider choices from the participant and/or Authorized
Representative in the order of preference. The choices may be obtained verbally, by mail, or during
and in-home visit. If the choices are made verbally, the choices are documented in the narrative in
the order of preference.

The Case Manager will contact the participant’s choice of provider for availability on requested
dates.

A 2-step PPD is required prior to authorization of the service. The first step of the PPD must be
completed prior to admission and the second step may be completed after admission.

The Case Manager must obtain the completed Respite Form which includes the participant’s
medical history, physical examination report and Physician’s Order. The Respite Form must be
completed no more than five (5) days prior to the Institutional (nursing home or hospital)
Respite admission.

Note: If it is not possible to obtain the Respite Form prior to admission, the provider may accept
      the medical information from the CLTC Assessment in lieu of the Respite Form. In such
      cases, the provider must obtain the Respite Form within forty-eight (48) hours of the respite
      admission.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                           Page 68
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023


The Case Manager must contact Area Office staff to request a PASRR be completed by the Nurse
Consultant prior to admission for the Respite – Institutional service for a participant who will be
receiving Respite service in a nursing home. Respite PASRR application will be created by Area
Office staff and request should not be sent to Centralized Intake for the PASRR application to be
created.

The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of the service in accordance
with the participant’s Service Plan.

The authorization for this service is day specific. The start date is the date of admission, and the
end date is the day before the discharge date. The comment section of the authorization should
specify the number of days the participant will be in respite as well as the discharge date.

The Service Provision Form must be completed and sent to the provider along with the Service
Plan, Respite Form and PASRR via fax or mail.

The reimbursement will include all those items and supplies associated with patient care except
prescribed medications and personal items. These items cannot be billed by the provider to
Medicaid or the participant.

Examples of items to be supplied by the provider include Durable Medical Equipment,
nonprescription medications, med pads, suctioning equipment and supplies, tube feeding
equipment and feeding supplies, dressing change supplies, ostomy supplies, catheters, and
tracheostomy supplies.

Participant and/or Authorized Representative will be responsible for supplying prescribed
medication and personal care items such as soap, mouthwash, deodorant, shampoo, and clothing
during the participant’s respite stay.

Participants are allowed a total of twenty-eight (28) days of respite during a fiscal year, but
no more than fourteen (14) of these days can be Institutional Respite in a nursing home or
hospital.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 69
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023

                                        7P Telemonitoring

A unit of service is a participant day of telemonitoring.

Telemonitoring is a service to monitor body weight, blood pressure, blood glucose level, oxygen
saturation, and basic heart rhythm information, for Community Choices participants who meet
specific criteria.

Community Choices Waiver participants must meet the following criteria in order to be considered
for the Telemonitoring service:

1.     Have a primary diagnosis of Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus, Hypertension, Chronic
       Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, and/or Congestive Heart Failure; and

2.     Have a history of at least two hospitalizations and/or emergency room visits in the past
       twelve (12) months; and

3.     Be capable of using the telemonitoring equipment and transmitting the necessary data or
       have an individual available that is capable of utilizing the telemonitoring equipment and
       transmitting the necessary data to the telemonitoring provider; and

4.     Have a primary care physician that approves the use of the telemonitoring service and who
       is solely responsible for receiving and acting upon the information via the telemonitoring
       service.

The Case Manager must complete the Community Choices Pre-Screening for telemonitoring
Form to assure the participant meets the criteria.

If the participant meets the criteria and chooses to receive the service, the Case Manager will update
the Service Plan to include the need for Telemonitoring.

The Case Manager will update the Service Plan to include the need for telemonitoring.

Prior approval must be requested via the service request section of the Service Plan in Phoenix.

Service Justification: State that Pre-screen has been completed and scanned in Phoenix.

A Physician Order is required for this service.

The Case Manager will contact the participant’s choice of provider for availability. The Case
Manager will send a copy of the Community Choices Pre-Screening for telemonitoring Form to
the chosen provider when the referral is accepted.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 70
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                      July 1, 2023

The telemonitoring provider must contact the participant’s physician to obtain the orders to
participate utilizing the approved SCDDHS Form. Upon receipt of the orders, the telemonitoring
provider must notify the Case Manager and negotiate a start date. If notification by the provider
has not been received within thirty (30) days of the referral, the Case Manager must call the
telemonitoring provider to follow up on the status.

The Case Manager will authorize the amount, frequency, and duration of services in accordance
with the participant’s Service Plan.

The Service Provision Form must be sent to the provider by fax or mail. The initial Service Plan
and the new Service Plan created following re-evaluation will be sent to the provider by fax or
mail.

If upon Re-evaluation, the participant no longer meets the initial criteria due to no hospitalization
or no Emergency Department visits, the Telemonitoring service may continue.




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                             Page 71
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023


 7Q Community Residential Care Facility Interactions with Home and Community Based
                         Waiver Programs November 2022


Incontinence Supplies can be authorized for participants residing in a residential care facility.
Waiver services that may be routinely authorized by CLTC, if appropriate:


            Community Choices                               HIV/AIDS
                Case Management                                 Case Management
   Personal Care Services up to 1 hour/day, 7      Personal Care Services up to 1 hour/day, 7
                  days/week                                                 days/week
             Nutritional Supplements                         Nutritional Supplements

Waiver services that may not be routinely authorized by CLTC, but may be given special consideration
on a case by case basis and require Central Office approval:

            Community Choices                               HIV/AIDS
                    ------------                                Medicaid Nursing
Waiver services that will not be authorized by CLTC:


            Community Choices                               HIV/AIDS
                Personal Care                                     Personal Care
             Adult Day Health Care                           Adult Day Health Care
         Adult Day Health Care Nursing                   Adult Day Health Care Nursing
                  Attendant Care                                 Attendant Care
             Home Delivered Meals                            Home Delivered Meals
             Pest Control/Advanced                           Pest Control/Advanced
                  Pest Control                                    Pest Control
                     PERS                                           ---------
                 Environmental                                   Environmental
             Modification/Enhanced                           Modification/Enhanced
                 Environmental                                   Environmental
                  Modification                                    Modification
                   Companion                                       Companion
                 Telemonitoring                                      ---------



Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 72
 SCDHHS
 Community Choices Policy and Procedure Manual
 Chapter 7 – Service Authorization Procedures                                     July 1, 2023




                                    7RHospice Benefit Interactions

Waiver services that may be routinely authorized by CLTC, if appropriate:
    Community Choices                   HIV                            Vent
    Case Management                     Case Management                Case Management
    Home Delivered Meals                Home Delivered Meals           Home Delivered Meals
    Nutritional Supplements             Nutritional Supplements        Nutritional Supplements
    PERS                                --                             PERS
    Pest Control                        Pest Control                   Pest Control

Waiver services that may not be routinely authorized by CLTC, but may be given special
consideration on a case by case basis and require Central Office approval:
      Community Choices             HIV                               Vent
 Environmental Modification          Environmental Modification      Environmental Modification

   Enhanced Environmental              Enhanced Environmental          Enhanced Environmental
        Modifications                      Modifications                    Modifications
     Advanced Pest Control               Advanced Pest Control          Advanced Pest Control

Waiver services that will not be authorized by CLTC:
  Community Choices                 HIV                                 Vent
  Adult Day Health Care             --                                  --
  Adult Family Home                 --                                  --
  Attendant                         Attendant                           Attendant
  Companion                         Companion                           -----------
  Incontinence Supplies             Incontinence Supplies               Incontinence Supplies
  Personal Care Services            Personal Care Services              Personal         Care
                                                                        Services
   --                                  Private Duty Nursing             Private Duty Nursing
   Respite                             --                               Respite
   Specialized Medical                 Specialized Medical              Specialized Medical
   Equipment                           Equipment                        Equipment
   Telemonitoring                      -----------                      -----------

   Self-Directed Services              Self-Directed Services           Self-Directed Services




Chapter 7 – Service Authorization                                                            Page 73
