Division of Community Long Term Care
CLTC Applicant/Participant Who is a Family Member
of a CLTC Worker Policy and Procedure                                 Effective Date: July 1, 2024


        CLTC Applicant/Participant Who is a Family Member of a CLTC Worker
                                Policy and Procedure

This Policy applies to all Community Long Term Care waivers and programs.

The CLTC Applicant/Participant Who is a Family Member of a CLTC Worker Policy and
Procedure is to describe the actions to be taken when a CLTC Applicant/Participant is related to a
CLTC Worker. This policy is to preserve program integrity and to ensure each
Applicant/Participant receives the appropriate services.

   •   This policy applies to all CLTC Applicants/Participants who are related to a CLTC Worker
       or to the spouse of a CLTC Worker by blood or marriage for the following relationships:
       spouse, child, parent, step-child, step-parent, sibling, grandparent, aunt or uncle. This
       policy also applies to fiancé relationships or other live-in relationships where the CLTC
       Worker will be involved in service planning and/or delivery of services.

   •   CLTC Workers include anyone working as Area Administrator, Satellite Office
       Supervisor, Lead Team Nurse Consultant, Lead Team Case Manager, Case Manager II,
       Nurse Consultant, State Case Manager, Support Staff, Assessment Consultant, Provider
       Case Manager or Independent Case Manager.

   •   The policy applies only when the Applicant/Participant is in the same Area Office (whether
       it be the CLTC Worker’s primary or secondary office) as the CLTC Worker to whom the
       Applicant/Participant is related.

   •    Apart from any other restrictions stated here, it is never appropriate for a CLTC Worker
       to conduct an assessment on or provide case management for a family member or to access
       related records in Phoenix, Care Call or MMIS.

When one of the above indicated relative of a CLTC Worker applies for a CLTC Program:

   1. Applicant/Participant is related to Lead Team Case Manager, Case Manager II, Nurse
      Consultant, State Case Manager, Support Staff, Assessment Consultant, Provider Case
      Manager or Independent Case Manager: The Applicant/Participant case assignment may
      remain in the receiving Area Office. However, the Level of Care Determination Reviewer
      and Prior Approval of Services Approver must be a worker in a different CLTC Area
      Office. The assigned CLTC Worker will be responsible for contacting the appropriate
      worker in the Area Office that will be providing the review or approval. The Area
      Administrator or designee will provide assistance as needed.




Appendix IV – Family Members                                                               Page 2
Division of Community Long Term Care
CLTC Applicant/Participant Who is a Family Member
of a CLTC Worker Policy and Procedure                                Effective Date: July 1, 2024

   2. Applicant/Participant is related to Area Administrator, Satellite Office Supervisor or Lead
      Team Nurse Consultant: The Applicant/Participant case assignment will be transferred to
      a different CLTC Area Office utilizing the current Policy and Procedure for Transfer of a
      Case to Another Area Office to complete the initial assessment and Level of Care
      Determination. Once enrolled in the waiver, the case may be managed by a Case Manager
      in the office where the relative works. However, Level of Care Determination Reviewer
      and Prior Approval of Services Approver must be a worker in a different CLTC Area
      Office. Assigned CLTC Worker will be responsible for contacting the appropriate worker
      in the Area office that will be providing the review or approval. The Area Administrator
      or designee will provide assistance as needed.

   3. The Area Administrator or Satellite Office Supervisor must be informed immediately by
      the related worker of the family member’s application/participation in a CLTC program.

   4. The Area Administrator or Satellite Office Supervisor must closely monitor compliance to
      this policy and maintain an up-to-date log of these cases. The log should include the
      Applicant/Participant Name and CLTC Number, related CLTC Worker, Assigned Worker
      and Area Office providing the review or service approval.




Appendix IV – Family Members                                                              Page 2
