HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES PROVIDER MANUAL              July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES   Program Overview




HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED
SERVICES (HCBS)
PROVIDER MANUAL
JULY 1, 2024

South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services




                                                                              1
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES PROVIDER MANUAL                                                                          July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                                               Program Overview



Contents
  1 PROGRAM OVERVIEW ........................................................................................................................... 3

 2 COVERED POPULATIONS ELIGIBILITY/ SPECIAL POPULATIONS ……………………………………..8

  3 ELIGIBLE PROVIDERS .......................................................................................................................... 10

  4 QUALITY ASSURANCE ......................................................................................................................... 12

  5 COVERED SERVICES AND DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................... 16

  6 UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT................................................................................................................ 34

  7 REPORTING/DOCUMENTATION .......................................................................................................... 36

  8 BILLING GUIDANCE .............................................................................................................................. 38




                                                                                                                                           2
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES PROVIDER MANUAL                                           July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                Program Overview




1 PROGRAM OVERVIEW
Program Description

       The South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services (SCDHHS) oversees the provision of
       Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) delivered to eligible participants with long term care
       needs, if they choose, allowing them to remain in a community-based environment. The South
       Carolina Department of Health and Human Services (SCDHHS) administers and operates several
       1915(c) HCBS waiver programs: Community Choices waiver (CC); HIV/AIDS waiver; Medically
       Complex Children’s waiver (MCC), and Mechanical Ventilation Dependent waiver (Vent). SCDHHS
       also administers the following HCBS programs/services: Children’s Personal Care (CPC), Private
       Duty Nursing (PDN), and Program for All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE).

       SCDHHS retains administrative authority for the following waivers: Head and Spinal Cord Injury
       (HASCI), Intellectual Disability/Related Disabilities (ID/RD), and Community Supports (CS). SCDHHS
       has delegated operational authority to the South Carolina Department of Disabilities and Special
       Needs (SCDDSN) for operation of these waivers.

       SCDHHS retains administrative authority for the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care (PCSC)
       waiver. SCDHHS has delegated operational authority to the South Carolina Continuum of Care for
       operation of this waiver.

       HCBS waiver programs allow participants who meet an institutional level of care to receive services
       and supports not covered through the South Carolina Medicaid State Plan. These services and
       supports are provided through the waiver programs to assist participants in remaining in their own
       home or other community setting. Pursuant to 42 CFR 441.301(a)(3), the state refuses entrance to the
       waiver to any otherwise eligible participant when the state reasonably expects that the cost of the
       home and community-based services furnished to that participant would exceed 100% of the cost of
       the level of care specified for the waiver, or for the CS waiver, when the state reasonably expects that
       the cost of home and community-based services furnished to that individual would exceed the amount
       specified by the state that is less than the cost of a level of care specified for the waiver. The HCBS
       Provider Manual is complementary to SCDHHS’s general policies and procedures detailed in the
       Provider Administrative and Billing Manual. It provides policies and requirements specific for HCBS
       providers for the HCBS waiver programs, CPC, PDN, and PACE programs.

       HCBS providers must review, reference, and comply with the HCBS Provider Manual, the Provider
       Administrative and Billing Manual, and all appendices and supplements.

SCDHHS Operated Waivers

   Community Choices (CC) Waiver

       The Community Choices (CC) waiver is designed to serve Medicaid-eligible participants who
       are age 18 or older, have long term care needs and meet nursing home level of care. To avoid
       or delay costly nursing home admission, participants can access the services necessary to
       receive care at home through careful assessment, service planning, care coordination and
                                                                                                           3
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES PROVIDER MANUAL                                             July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                  Program Overview



       monitoring.

   HIV/AIDS Waiver

       The Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS) waiver is
       designed to serve Medicaid-eligible participants with HIV/AIDS, regardless of age, who choose to live
       at home but have long term care needs and are at risk for hospitalization.

   Mechanical Ventilator Dependent (Vent) Waiver

       The Mechanical Ventilator Dependent waiver (Vent) waiver is designed to serve Medicaid-eligible
       participants aged 21 or older who are dependent on mechanical ventilation at least 6 hours per day
       and have long term care needs. Participants can receive services to supplement care in their home to
       avoid or delay costly nursing home admission, through careful assessment, service planning and
       service coordination.

   Medically Complex Children (MCC) Waiver

       The Medically Complex Children (MCC) waiver is designed to serve children up to age 21 diagnosed
       with a serious illness or condition expected to last at least twelve (12) months. The waiver participants
       must meet the following state defined medical criteria, which identify the child as being dependent
       upon the evaluation of medications, hospitalizations, skilled nursing services, specialists, and ancillary
       services. The MCC waiver serves children who meet hospital level of care.

   Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE)

       PACE is a federal Medicaid and Medicare capitated program serving participants in the greater
       Columbia area (Richland and Lexington counties) who meet all the following criteria:

          •   Are age 55 or older;

          •   Meet nursing home level of care;

          •   Wish to remain in the community; and,

          •   Choose to participate in the program.

       Participants in PACE receive all services through PACE either directly from PACE staff, health care
       professionals or through subcontracted health care entities. Many of the services provided are
       centered in the PACE Adult Day Health Centers.

State Plan Services

   Children's Personal Care (CPC) Services

       CPC services provide personal care services in the community to Medicaid-eligible children under the
       age of 21 years of age who meet established medical necessity criteria of at least one functional
       deficit.


                                                                                                             4
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES PROVIDER MANUAL                                                July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                     Program Overview



   Private Duty Nursing Services

       Private Duty Nursing is available for children under the age of 21 who meet established medical
       necessity criteria as outlined in the Children’s Private Duty Nursing Checklist.

Externally Operated Waivers

   Palmetto Coordinated System of Care (PCSC)

       SCDHHS contracts with the South Carolina Department of Children’s Advocacy’s Continuum of Care
       (COC) program to provide High Fidelity Wraparound services for children under the age of 21. Based
       on national research for children’s system of care and the approved waiver application, SCDHHS will
       only contract with entities employing High Fidelity Wraparound supervisors and coaches credentialed
       by the National Wrapround Implementation Center (NWIC).

       The PCSC waiver was developed for youth with significant behavioral health challenges or co-
       occurring conditions who are in, or at imminent risk of out-of-home placement. The PCSC waiver is an
       evidence-based approach that is part of a national movement to develop family-driven and youth
       guided care and keep youth at home, in school, and out of the child welfare and juvenile systems.

SCDDSN Operated Waivers

   Head and Spinal Cord Injury (HASCI) Waiver

       The HASCI waiver provides a broad range of HCBS to Medicaid-eligible participants with the most
       severe physical impairments involving head and spinal cord injuries, regardless of age. The HASCI
       waiver is designed to help participants who would otherwise require services in a nursing facility or
       Intermediate Care Facility for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities (ICF/IID) to remain independent
       in the community.

   Intellectual Disability/Related Disabilities (ID/RD) Waiver

       ID/RD waiver services are provided based on identified needs of the participant and the
       appropriateness of the service to meet the need regardless of age. Participants must meet SCDDSN
       ICF/IID level of care criteria to qualify for the service. A list of enrolled and qualified providers of ID/RD
       waiver services can be located at the DDSN website (www.ddsn.sc.gov) or by contacting the local
       DSN Board in the county in which the participant lives or the participant’s Waiver Case Manager/Early
       Intervention provider is located.

   Community Supports (CS) Waiver

       The CS waiver allows participants ages 3 and older with an ID/RD to choose to receive care at home
       rather than in an ICF/IID. Although the participants may choose to receive care at home, he/she must
       require the level of care that would be provided in an ICF/IID. The CS waiver has an individual cost
       limit within which services are provided.

SCDHHS Money Follows the Person Demonstration Grant (Home Again)

       Home Again serves Medicaid participants who are older adults, have physical disabilities, or
                                                                                                                5
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES PROVIDER MANUAL                                               July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                    Program Overview



       intellectual disabilities who have resided in a Medicaid funded skilled nursing facility or hospital for 60
       days or more that wish to transition to a community setting. Home Again funds the first year of
       services before transitioning participants into one of the qualifying HCBS waivers in SCDHHS.
       Participants must meet the NF level of care.

Waiver Case Management and Care Coordination Functions

   Case Management

       Case management is a vital part of the HCBS program that is provided for all waiver participants.
       Case management for HASCI, CS and ID/RD waiver participants are provided by the DDSN network
       of qualified providers

       Case management ensures continued access to the HCBS programs. It also enables case managers
       to advise, support and assist participants and their families in coping with changing needs and in
       making decisions regarding long-term care.

       Case management includes the following five activities: service counseling, service planning, service
       coordination, monitoring, and annual re-evaluation. Included in these activities is the requirement for
       quarterly face-to-face visits with the participant in their home.

       The case management provider and its staff must be independent of the service delivery system and
       not a provider of services that could be incorporated into a SCDHHS/SCDDSN participant's plan of
       care ("conflict free case management"). These services include, but are not limited to,
       SCDHHS/SCDDSN waiver services, home health services, and hospice services. SCDHHS is the
       final decision authority regarding questions concerning conflict free case management. This is a
       requirement of the federal regulation 42 CFR 441.301(c)(1)(vi).

   Intake

       The intake process identifies participants who may be eligible for the program and serves as an
       information and referral source for those who do not meet intake criteria. The SCDHHS CLTC Area
       Office and the local DSN board ensure that all participants with perceived long term care needs
       receive every opportunity for exposure to the waiver, identified state plan services and grant funded
       programs. For MCC and PCSC, intake is completed by SCDHHS. The intake telephone numbers are
       as follows:

       For all DHHS waiver participant referrals, complete referral form at
       https://phoenix.scdhhs.gov/cltc_referrals/new.

       For all DDSN waiver participant referrals, call 1-800-289-7012.

   Assessment

       Assessment uses a comprehensive standard instrument to determine a participant’s current long term
       care needs. Information obtained during the assessment process will assist staff in making a level of
       care decision and initiating a plan of service for discussion with the participant and/or family.



                                                                                                               6
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES PROVIDER MANUAL                                          July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                               Program Overview



    Service Planning

       Service planning encompasses a comprehensive review of the participant’s problems and strengths
       utilizing a person-centered approach. Mutually agreed-upon goals are set based on identified needs.
       This service planning process allows for participation of the participant and/or family, physician,
       service providers, children’s personal care monitoring vendors, care coordinators, and/or the
       SCDHHS case management team. Service planning provides participants with information necessary
       to make an informed choice regarding the location of care and services to be utilized. The outcome of
       this process is a written plan of service.

       For further clarification regarding policies and standards for DDSN operated waivers, please see
       https://ddsn.sc.gov/.

       NOTE: References to supporting documents and information are included throughout the manual.
       This information is found at the following locations:

•   Provider Administrative and Billing Manual

•   Procedure Codes

•   Forms




                                                                                                          7
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                     July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                               Covered Populations




2 COVERED POPULATIONS ELIGIBILITY/ SPECIAL
POPULATIONS
Beneficiary Requirements

   The South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services (SCDHHS) Home and Community-
   Based Services provides reimbursement for medically necessary services for full-benefit Medicaid-
   eligible participants who are determined to meet the level of care as specified for the program in the
   list below:

                                                                          Child &
                Medical
                                                                        Adolescent
               Eligibility        NF Level of       DDSN ICF-IID
 Program                                                                  Service            Hospital
              Assessment             Care           Level of Care
                                                                         Intensity
                  Tool
                                                                        Instrument
                                    Skilled or
    CC
                                  Intermediate
                                    Skilled or
   Vent
                                  Intermediate

                                                                                            At risk for
 HIV/AIDS
                                                                                          hospitalization
                                                                                            At risk for
   MCC         8 or above
                                                                                          hospitalization
                                                                      Meet criteria in      At risk for
  PCSC
                                                                      one category        hospitalization
                                    Skilled or
  HASCI                                                 Meets
                                  Intermediate

  ID/RD                                                 Meets

    CS                                                  Meets

  Home                              Skilled or
  Again                           Intermediate

       For CC, HIV/AIDS, Vent waivers, the level of care determination is the process of identifying the
       extent of a participant’s medical, psycho-behavioral, and functional disability in keeping with the South
       Carolina level of care Criteria for Medicaid-Sponsored Long-Term Care. For ID/RD, CS, and HASCI,
       the disability would have to meet DDSN ICF/IID level of care criteria.



                                                                                                            8
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                     July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                               Covered Populations



       The CASII has six dimensions that are used to determine the intensity of needed services which are:

          •   Risk of Harm
          •   Functional Status,
          •   Co-Morbidity
          •   Recovery Environment
          •   Resilience and Treatment History
          •   Acceptance and Engagement

       Each dimension has a five-point rating scale. For each of the five possible ratings within each
       dimension, a set of criteria is clearly defined. Only one criterion needs to be met for that rating to be
       selected. The CASII LOC determination is set at the same levels as the South Carolina hospitals level
       of care.

Verifying Beneficiary’s Eligibility

       Participating Healthy Connections providers must access beneficiary eligibility information through the
       SCDHHS’ Medicaid Web Portal Customer Service Center. Beneficiaries must be eligible on the date
       of service for payment to be made.




                                                                                                            9
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                   July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                               Eligible Providers




3 ELIGIBLE PROVIDERS
Provider Qualifications

       All HCBS services have prerequisites for participation and require enrollment/contracts with SCDHHS.
       Certain licensing requirements may also exist. Please see the Provider Administrative and Billing
       Manual for general Medicaid enrollment and licensing requirements.

       For general information regarding provider qualifications and enrollment in the South Carolina Healthy
       Connections Medicaid program please refer to the Provider Administrative and Billing Manual. Specific
       provider qualifications for HCBS vary depending on the service. Qualifications for each provider can
       be found in HCBS Scopes and Standards linked below.

        •    ADHC Nursing
        •    Adult Day Health Care
        •    Advanced Pest Control Standards
        •    Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
        •    Case Management
        •    Companion (Agency)
        •    Companion (Self-Directed)
        •    Environmental Modifications Standards
        •    Home Delivered Meals
        •    Institutional Respite
        •    Nursing Services
        •    Pediatric Medical Day Care
        •    Personal Care, Children's Personal Care HASCI Attendant Care, ID/RD Respite, CS Respite,
             PCSC Respite, MCC Unskilled Respite
        •    Personal Emergency Response System (PERS)
        •    Pest Control Standards
        •    Residential Personal Care
        •    Respite CRCF
        •    Skilled In-Home Respite Vent
        •    Skilled Respite MCC
        •    Telemonitoring
        •    Transition Coordination

       HCBS providers must meet all applicable Medicaid provider qualifications and state licensure
       regulations specified by the South Carolina Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (LLR).
       Medicaid reimbursement is available for Home and Community-Based Services when provided
       by the qualified Home and Community-Based Services provider per the prior authorization
       process.

                                                                                                          10
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                     July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                 Eligible Providers



       Services rendered by the HCBS provider must conform to the federal and state laws, rules, and
       regulations.

       The providers whose scopes are listed above are eligible to enroll with SCDHHS to bill HCBS
       delivered to eligible members. Providers for Adult Day Health Care, Nursing Services, Personal Care
       Services, Pest Control, Personal Emergency Response System, and In-Home Respite Providers can
       also provide HCBS to eligible members in a DDSN-operated waiver.

       For specific requirements on Provider enrollment refer to SCDHHS’s website at:
       https://www.provider/scdhhs.gov/providers/become-provider

       For any other SCDDSN waiver service, providers must be SCDDSN qualified. Please refer to the
       SCDDSN website at https://ddsn.sc.gov/ for more information. Please note that Companion Services
       for SCDHHS does not allow providers to provide services for SCDDSN participants. Adult Companion
       Service providers must be qualified through SCDDSN

       Enrolled providers are prohibited from using their NPI to bill Medicaid for services rendered by a non-
       enrolled, terminated or excluded provider.




                                                                                                            11
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                      July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                 Quality Assurance




4    QUALITY ASSURANCE


       SCDHHS and SCDDSN have implemented Quality Assurance processes to ensure that providers are
       following the requirements as outlined in policy and scopes of services.
       Note: SCDDSN has a separate Quality Management process. Information regarding their Quality
       Assurance Process can be found here: https://ddsn.sc.gov/ddsn-divisions/quality-management

Overview of SCDHHS compliance review process

       For Adult Day Health Care (ADHC), Personal Care Services (PCS), and Nursing Services (NS) only,
       SCDHHS has developed this provider compliance policy. The policy gives detailed information on how
       provider compliance sanctions are implemented. Provider reviews receive a score based on a
       sanctioning scale; review scores will determine if the provider receives a sanction and if so, the level
       of the sanction. The sanction scoring process was developed to ensure that reviews are equitable and
       for providers to know what to expect when they are reviewed.
             The following chart outlines how reviews are scored:

   Sanction Level

       Provider compliance review questions in the Scope of Services are classified into three severity levels,
       based on (1) the significance of the question regarding to the services, and (2) the potential influences
       on providers and participants if the requirement was not met. See the example below:

       Severity level: 1= less serious, 2 = serious, 3 = very serious


                      Participant Service Questions            Possible           Severity
                                                               Answers            Level
                      Was supervisory visit made within 30
                                                               Y, N, NA           3
                      days after PCPC services initiated?

                      Was the initial supervisory visit
                      documented in Electronic Visit           Y, N, NA           3
                      Verification (EVV) System?

                      Does provider maintain individual
                                                               Y, N               2
                      participant records?

                      Did provider give participant written
                      information regarding advanced           Y, N, NA           1
                      directives?



                      Sanctions:

              •   Corrective Action Plan (CAP) - This is the lowest sanction and indicates the
                                                                                                             12
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                       July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                  Quality Assurance



                  provider is in substantial non-compliance with the contractual requirements.
                  Providers with an initial compliance score of 50 or more will be required to submit a
                  plan of correction outlining the deficiency(ies), the detailed plan to correct the
                  deficiency (ies) and the effective date the plan will be implemented. A CAP
                  Template is in Phoenix Help Documents under Miscellaneous Forms that providers
                  may choose to use. If the corrective action plan is not approved, the Provider will
                  be given an additional ten (10) business days to submit another corrective action
                  plan for review and approval. If the second submitted corrective action plan is not
                  approved, the provider will be suspended from providing new referrals until the
                  corrective action plan has been received and approved. Please note, any
                  documentation that was not available during the compliance visit will not be
                  accepted as a part of the plan of correction. All documentation must be in the
                  appropriate record at the time of the review.
              •   Educational Intervention- At this level, the provider is requested to have the
                  appropriate staff attend training by the South Carolina Department of Health and
                  Human Services to improve knowledge of HCBS policies and procedures/Scope of
                  Services. Educational Intervention is required if the compliance score is 100 or
                  more points. If Educational Intervention training has not been received within 30
                  days of sanction, the provider will be suspended from receiving new referrals until
                  the educational training is received.

                  Providers may request educational training provided by SCDHHS at any time by
                  sending an email request to: provider-distribution@scdhhs.gov
              •   90-day suspension – Indicates an initial (interim) review with four hundred (400) or
                  more points indicating serious and widespread deficiencies, new referrals are
                  suspended for ninety (90) days.
              •   Termination – Indicates a routine review final review score of four hundred (400) or
                  more points or very serious and widespread deficiencies. Providers who have been
                  terminated due to a compliance review cannot reapply to be a provider of
                  SCDHHS/SCDDSN services for three (3) years from the date of termination.
                  Providers who have two (2) consecutive reviews with a score of 100 or more, will be
                  terminated if the third consecutive review has a final score of 100 and above.

   Calculating process

       SCDHHS has developed a system to score reviews based on the percentage of the identified
       deficiency and number of participants surveyed. Following is an outline of how reviews will be scored:

       The level of sanction will be decided based on the total score of the provider’s current review and the
       provider’s review history, which is converted from the deficiency percentage.

              Every 5% deficiency counts for 1 point in each class; the total score comes from the total
              points from each level.

              Since each level has different severity, multiple points will be added to each class’s score.
              Final score = level 3 = unweighted points x 3 + level 2 = unweighted basic points x 2+ level 1 =
                                                                                                              13
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                       July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                  Quality Assurance



              unweighted points x 1

          Example:


              Level                        Deficiency percentage        Basic points    Final points

              Level 1 (less serious)       28%                          5               5x1=5
              Level 2 (serious)            20%                          4               4x2=8

              Level 3 (major)              35%                          7               7x3=21

              Final score                                                               34


       Based on the total score a sanction level is determined. If a provider has no deficiencies, they
       will not be subject to a sanction. Below is a chart that illustrates the sanction that will be
       imposed based on the final review score:

              Score                              w/ Good History*                Sanction
              0-50                               0-99                            No further
                                                                                 sanction
              51-99                              100-149                         Corrective Action
                                                                                 Plan
              100-399                            150-449                         Mandatory
                                                                                 educational
                                                                                 training
              Initial Review 400 or              n/a                             90-day suspension of new
              above                                                              referrals and mandatory
                                                                                 educational training
              Routine Review 400                 Routine Review 450              Termination
              or above                           or above

            *Good History is determined based on previous review scores of 50 or below. For
            example, if a provider’s previous review had a total score of 50 and their current review
            has a score of 120, the sanction for the current review will be corrective action rather than
            mandatory educational training based on the previous review score.
       Scores are automatically calculated using a computer-generated compliance review program.
       Provider records will be reviewed periodically at the provider’s office or obtained from the
       provider’s office for later review. Onsite visits are unannounced. If a reviewer (HCBS, Program
       Integrity or any other government entity) arrives at the provider’s office to conduct a
       survey/visit and/or obtain records for a survey and no one is there, the following sanctions will
       be imposed:
                 •    First time – thirty (30) day suspension of new referrals

                 •    Second time – ninety (90) day suspension of new referrals
                                                                                                              14
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                    July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                               Quality Assurance



                •   Third time – contract termination

Note ADHC Providers Only:

       Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) requires Adult Day Health Care Centers servicing
       HCBS (waiver) participants to be in compliance with their settings requirements.

       Providers of Adult Day Health Care Services must meet all requirements as outlined in 42 CFR §
       441.301(c) (4)). These requirements have been integrated into the HCBS Adult Day Health Care
       Provider Scope of Services.

       SCDHHS will terminate contracts with existing ADHC providers whose settings do not meet all the
       requirements outlined by CMS for the settings rule.

       New providers are trained on all ADHC Setting requirements and settings are reviewed in a site visit to
       ensure that the ADHC is 100% compliant with these requirements prior to enrollment to provide
       services. After the initial enrollment, compliance surveys will ensure continued compliance with these
       requirements. Any non-compliance with these requirements the compliance survey process will result
       in remediation and possible sanctions up to termination of your contract with SCDHHS for the non-
       compliant setting




                                                                                                           15
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                           July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                        Covered Services




5       COVERED SERVICES AND DEFINITIONS


A table displaying the waiver program to which the SCDHHS covered services are
associated with is included here with their associated definitions to follow.


                                                                                                   Mechanical
                                       Community
                               State                CS      HASCI    HIV/AIDS   Home    ID/RD      Ventilator     MCC      PCSC
                                        Choices
                               Plan                Waiver   Waiver    Waiver    Again   Waiver     Dependent      Waiver   Waiver
                                         Waiver
                                                                                                    Program

 Adult Day Health Care
                                          X          X                           X        X
 (ADHC) Nursing

 ADHC Services                            X          X                           X        X

 Adult Dental                                                                             X

 Adult Vision                                                                             X

 Assistive Technology and
                                                     X
 Appliances
 Assistive Technology and
 Appliances Assessment/                              X
 Consultation

 Attendant Care Services                  X                   X         X        X        X             X

 Audiology Services                                           X                           X

 Behavior Support Services                           X        X                           X

 Career Preparation Services                         X        X                           X

 Case Management                          X          X        X         X        X        X             X

 Children's Personal Care       X

 Community Services
                                                     X                                    X
 (Individual and/or Group)

                                          X                             X        X        X
 Companion Services

 Day Activity                                        X        X                           X

 Employment Services                                 X        X                           X

 Environmental
                                          X          X        X         X        X        X             X           X
 Modifications
 Environmental Modification,
 Specialized Supplies, and                X                             X        X                      X
 Adaptations
 Expanded Goods and
                                                                                 X
 Services


                                                                                                            16
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                               July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                            Covered Services




                                                                                                       Mechanical
                                           Community
                                 State                  CS      HASCI    HIV/AIDS   Home    ID/RD      Ventilator     MCC      PCSC
                                            Choices
                                 Plan                  Waiver   Waiver    Waiver    Again   Waiver     Dependent      Waiver   Waiver
                                             Waiver
                                                                                                        Program
 Habilitation Services (Day)                                                X

 Habilitation Services
 (Prevocational)
 Habilitation Services
                                                                  X                           X
 (Residential)

 High Fidelity Wrap Around                                                                                                       X

 Health Education for
                                                                  X
 Consumer-Directed Care

 Home Delivered Meals                         X                             X        X                      X

 In-Home Supports                                        X

 Incontinence Supplies             X

 Individual Directed Goods
                                                                                                                                 X
 and Supplies (IDGS)
                                X (up to
 Nursing Services                                                 X         X                 X             X
                                  21)

 Occupational Therapy                                             X

 Pediatric Medical Day Care                                                                                             X

 Peer Guidance for
                                                                  X
 Consumer-Directed Care
 Personal Care Services
                                              X          X                  X        X        X             X
 (PCS)
 Personal Emergency
                                              X          X        X                  X        X
 Response System (PERS)
 Pest Control and Advanced
                                              X                             X        X                      X
 Pest Control Treatment

 Physical Therapy                                                 X

 Private Vehicle Modification                            X        X                           X

 Private Vehicle Modification
 Assessment/Consultation

 Psychological Services                                           X

 Respite (In-Home)                                       X                                    X             X           X

 Respite (Institutional/NF)                   X          X        X                           X             X

 Respite Care in a
 Community Residential                        X
 Care Facility

 RN Care Coordination                                                                                                   X

 Specialized Medical
 Supplies, Equipment and                                                                      X
 Assistive Technology

                                                                                                                17
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                        July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                     Covered Services




                                                                                                Mechanical
                                    Community
                            State                CS      HASCI    HIV/AIDS   Home    ID/RD      Ventilator     MCC      PCSC
                                     Choices
                            Plan                Waiver   Waiver    Waiver    Again   Waiver     Dependent      Waiver   Waiver
                                      Waiver
                                                                                                 Program
 Specialized Medical
 Supplies, Equipment and
                                                                     X                 X
 Assistive Technology
 Assessment/Consultation

 Skilled Respite Services

 Speech and Hearing
                                                           X                                                     X
 Services

 Support Center Services                          X                                    X

 Transition Coordination                                                      X

 Tele-Monitoring                       X                                      X

 Unskilled Respite                                                                                                        X




Adult Day Health Care Services

          Services generally furnished five or more hours per day on a regularly scheduled
          basis, for one or more days per week, or as specified in the service plan, in a licensed
          non-institutional, community-based setting, encompassing both health and social
          services needed to ensure the optimal functioning of the participant. This includes off-
          site outings and other efforts designed to provide socialization and integrate
          participants into the community. Meals provided as a part of these services shall not
          constitute a “full nutritional regimen” (3 meals per day).

Adult Day Health Care-Nursing Services

          Licensed nursing services provided on a part-time or intermittent basis while the
          participant is attending SMA sponsored ADHC. Nursing procedures are limited to
          ostomy care, urinary catheter care, decubitus and/or wound care, tracheostomy care,
          tube feedings, and nebulizer treatments which require medication. This service must
          be ordered by a physician to meet the participant’s care needs.

Adult Dental Services

          Adult dental services are defined and described in the approved Medicaid State Plan.
          ID/RD waiver funded adult dental services will not duplicate any service available to
          adults aged 21 and older in the State Plan. Items/services allowed under the waiver
          are the same as the standard items/services for children under age 21.

Adult Vision Services

          Adult vision services are included in the ID/RD waiver as an extension to the vision
          services included in the State Plan. In the Medicaid State Plan, specified vision
          services are only available to Medicaid participants who are under age 21. The ID/RD
                                                                                                         18
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                              July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                           Covered Services




       waiver removes the age restriction making the same vision services available to those
       who are over age 21 and enrolled in the waiver.

Assistive Technology and Appliances

       Assistive Technology and Appliances is a device, an item, piece of equipment, or
       product system that is used to increase or improve functional capabilities of
       participants thereby resulting in a decrease or avoidance of need for other waiver
       services.

       For SCDDSN, this service may include training or technical assistance for the
       participant, or, where appropriate, the family members, guardians, advocates, or
       authorized representatives of the participant. Appliances intended for general
       household utility that do not result in a decrease in need for other waiver services are
       not covered. This service is not intended to replace traditional household appliances
       for the convenience of family/household members or caregivers. Additionally, devices,
       items, equipment and/or product systems not proven effective, or deemed trial or
       experimental are not covered. Repairs not covered by warranty are covered, and
       replacement of parts/equipment are covered, if these repairs or parts/equipment are
       not related to abuse, mistreatment or carelessness. The lifetime limit on repairs (not
       covered under warranty) and/or replacement of parts/equipment is $1,000. To the
       extent that any listed services are covered under the state plan, the services under
       the waiver would be limited to additional services not otherwise covered under the
       state plan, but consistent with waiver objectives of avoiding institutionalization.


Assistive Technology and Appliances Assessment/Consultation

       Assistive Technology and Appliances Assessment/Consultation may be provided (if
       not covered under the State Plan Medicaid) once a participant's specific need has
       been identified and documented in the Support Plan. The scope of the work and
       specifications must be determined. Consultation and assessment may include specific
       needs related to the participant's disability for which assistive technology and/or
       appliances will assist the participant to function more independently. Appliances
       intended for general household utility that do not result in a decrease in need for other
       waiver services are not covered. This service is not intended to replace traditional
       household appliances for the convenience of family/household members or
       caregivers. Additionally, devices, items, equipment and/or product systems not
       proven effective, or deemed trial or experimental are not covered.

       Assistive technology and assessments/consultations must be provided by Medicaid
       enrolled Occupational or Physical Therapists, Medicaid enrolled Rehabilitation
       Engineering Technologists, Assistive Technology Practitioners and Assistive
       Technology Suppliers certified by the Rehabilitation Engineering Society of North
       American (RESNA), Medicaid enrolled Environmental Access/Consultants/contractors
       certified by Professional Resource in Management (PRIME).




                                                                                               19
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                              July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                           Covered Services




Attendant Care Services

       Self-directed hands-on care of both a supportive and health related nature.
       Supportive services are those which substitute for the absence, loss, diminution, or
       impairment of a physical or cognitive function. This service may include skilled or
       nursing care to the extent permitted by state law. Limited housekeeping activities,
       which are incidental to the performance of care, may also be furnished as part of this
       activity.

Audiology Services

       Audiology Services are included in the ID/RD waiver as an extension to the audiology
       services included in the State Plan. In the State Plan, specified audiology services are
       only available to Medicaid beneficiaries who are under age 21. The ID/RD waiver
       removes the age restriction, making the same audiology services available to those
       who are over age 21 and enrolled in the ID/RD waiver. This service will not duplicate
       any services available to adults in the State Plan.

Behavior Support Services

       Behavior Support are those services which use current, empirically validated
       practices to identify functions of target behaviors, prevent the occurrence of problem
       behavior, teach appropriate, functionally equivalent replacement behavior and react
       therapeutically to problematic behavior. These services include:

                  a. Initial behavioral assessment for determining the need for and
                     appropriateness of behavior support services and for determining the
                     function of the behaviors. Behavioral assessment (i.e., functional
                     assessment and/or analysis) includes direct observation and collection
                     of antecedent-behavior-consequence data, an interview of key
                     persons, a preference assessment, collection of objective data
                     (including antecedent-behavior-consequence data) and analysis of
                     behavioral/functional assessment data to determine the function of the
                     behaviors

                  b. Behavioral intervention (including staff/caregiver training), based on
                     the functional assessment, that is primarily focused on replacement
                     and prevention of the problem behavior(s) based on their function; and

                  c. An assessment of the success of the intervention through progress
                     monitoring that includes analysis of behavioral data, any changes
                     (including medication) and any needed modifications.

Career Preparation Services

       Career preparation services are time-limited and aimed at preparing individuals for
       competitive employment and engaging a participant in identifying a career direction.
       These services can include experiences and exposure to careers and teach such
                                                                                                20
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                               July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                            Covered Services




       concepts as attendance, task completion, problem solving, interpersonal relations and
       safety as outlined in the individual's person-centered plan. Services are designed to
       create a path to integrated community-based employment for which an individual is
       compensated at or above minimum wage. On-site attendance at the licensed facility
       is not required to receive services that originate from the facility. The cost for
       transportation is included in the rate paid to the provider.

       Transportation will be provided from the individual’s residence to the habilitation site
       when the service start time is before 12:00 noon. Transportation will be available from
       the individual’s habilitation site to their residence when the service start time is after
       12:00 noon.

Case Management (SCDHHS)

       Services that assist participants in gaining access to needed waiver and other state
       plan services, as well as medical, social, educational, and other services regardless
       of the funding source for the services accessed. Case managers are responsible for
       ongoing monitoring and the coordination of the provision of services included in the
       participant’s person-centered service plan.

       At a minimum, case management activities include initial visit, monthly contact,
       quarterly visit, and re-evaluation visit. At least one of these case management
       activities must be completed every month and documented appropriately.

       Case management providers are not permitted to provide other direct waiver services
       or other services that are part of a participant’s person-centered service plan. Case
       managers are not allowed to receive any gifts or anything else of value from providers
       of waiver services. During case management orientation training, case managers are
       informed of conflict-of-interest requirements and must sign a disclosure form
       indicating understanding and agreement.

Case Management (SCDDSN)

       Services that assist participants in gaining access to needed waiver and other State
       Plan services, regardless of the funding sources for the services to which access is
       gained. Waiver case managers are responsible for initiating and/or conducting the
       process to evaluate and/or re-evaluate the individual’s level of care as specified in
       waiver policy. Waiver case managers are responsible for conducting assessments
       and developing service plans as specified in waiver policy. This includes the ongoing
       monitoring of the provision of services included in the participant’s service plan.
       Waiver case managers are responsible for the ongoing monitoring of the participant’s
       health and welfare, which may include crisis intervention, and referral to non-waiver
       services.

       The waiver also includes transitional waiver case management. Transitional WCM is
       used when a person in an institutional setting is being discharged from the setting and
       entering a waiver program. Persons served under the waiver may receive case
       management services while they are still institutionalized, for up to 180 consecutive
       days prior to discharge. The state can choose a limit of less than 180 days.
                                                                                                21
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                             Covered Services




Community Services (Participant and Group)

       Community services are aimed at developing one’s awareness of interaction with
       and/or participation in their community through exposure to and experience in the
       community and through teaching such concepts as self- determination, self-advocacy,
       socialization and the accrual of social capital. Services will be provided in facilities
       licensed by the state. On-site attendance at the licensed facility is not required to
       receive services that originated from the facility.

       Transportation will be provided from the individual’s residence to the habilitation site
       when the service start time is before 12:00 noon. Transportation will be available from
       the individual’s habilitation site to their residence when the service start time is after
       12:00 noon. The cost for transportation is included in the rate paid to the provider.

Companion (Agency or Self-Directed)

       Non-medical care, supervision, and socialization provided to a functionally impaired
       adult. Companions may assist or supervise the participant with light housekeeping
       tasks. Providers may also perform light housekeeping tasks that are incidental to the
       care and supervision of the participant. The provision of companion services does not
       entail hands-on care or assistance with activities of daily living; the companion care
       service does not duplicate the provision of the Personal Care service. This service is
       provided in accordance with a therapeutic goal in the service plan. There is a self-
       directed option for companion services.

Day Activity

       Supports and services provided in therapeutic settings to enable participants to
       achieve, maintain, improve, or decelerate the loss of personal care, social or adaptive
       skills. Services are provided in non-residential settings that are licensed by the state.
       Community activities that originate from a facility licensed by the state will be provided
       and billed as day activity. On-site attendance at the licensed facility is not required to
       receive services that originate from the facility.

       Transportation will be provided from the participant's residence to the habilitation site
       when the service start time is before 12:00 noon. Transportation will be available from
       the participant's habilitation site to their residence when the service start time is after
       12:00 noon. The cost for transportation is included in the rate paid to the provider.

Employment Services (Individual)

       Employment services (Individual) are the ongoing supports to individuals who,
       because of their disabilities, need intensive on-going support to obtain and maintain
       an individual job in competitive or customized employment, or self-employment, in an
       integrated work setting in the general workforce for which an individual is
       compensated at or above the minimum wage, but not less than the customary wage
       and level of benefits paid by the employer for the same or similar work performed by

                                                                                                 22
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                   July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                Covered Services




       individuals without disabilities. Transportation is not included as part of the service, or
       the rate paid for individual job placement.

Employment Services (Group)

       Employment services - group is the on-going supports to individuals who, because of
       their disabilities, need intensive ongoing support to obtain and maintain an individual
       job in competitive or customized employment, or self- employment, in an integrated
       work setting in the general workforce for which an individual is compensated at or
       above minimum wage, but not less than the customary wage and level of benefits
       paid by the employer for the same or similar work performed by individuals without
       disabilities. Employment services – group is provided in group settings, such as
       mobile work crews or enclaves and employees may be paid directly by the
       employer/business or by the employment services – group provider.

       Employment services - group is not a prerequisite for employment services –
       individual.

       Transportation will be provided from the individual’s residence to the habilitation site
       when the service start time is before 12:00 noon. Transportation will be available from
       the individual’s habilitation site to their residence when the service start time is after
       12:00 noon.

Environmental Modification and Adaptations (SCDHHS)

       Those physical adaptations to the private residence of the participant or the
       participant’s family, required by the participant’s service plan, that are necessary to
       ensure the health, welfare, and safety of the participant or that enable the participant
       to function with greater independence in the home. Such adaptations include the
       installation of ramps and grab-bars, widening of doorways, modification of bathroom
       facilities, provision of air conditioning units, and installation of specialized electric and
       plumbing systems necessary to accommodate the medical equipment and supplies
       required for the welfare of participants.

       These services may only be authorized based on a health and/or safety related issue.
       Case managers must evaluate the expressed need prior to authorizing the service.
       During this process, the case manager determines that there is an assessed need for
       the items, updates appropriate sections of Phoenix (the case management system
       used by case managers and SMA staff) to indicate the need for the items, updates
       the participant’s service plan, and requests prior approval in the service approval
       section of the service plan (including date the last item was received (if applicable).

       Per policy, the service justification for air conditioning units must emphasize the need
       based on health and safety related issues with specific information provided
       associating requests with a medical condition. The provision of air conditioning units
       is not intended for general utility and shall not be executed as such. SMA Regional
       Office staff review related requests and either approve or deny, utilizing medical
       expertise offered through Lead Team Nurses in Regional SMA offices, and/or SMA’s
       Medical Director in SMA Central Office, as needed. Following SMA approval the case
                                                                                                    23
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                               July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                            Covered Services




       manager may begin the authorization process.

       This service is limited to additional services not otherwise covered under the state
       plan, including EPSDT, but consistent with waiver objectives of avoiding
       institutionalization.

Environmental Modifications (SCDDSN)

       Those physical adaptations to the home, required by the individual's plan of care,
       which are necessary to ensure the health, welfare and safety of the individual, or
       which enable the individual to function with greater independence, and without which,
       the individual would require institutionalization. Home is defined as non-government
       subsidized living quarters, and modifications to any government-subsidized housing
       (i.e., group homes or community residential care facilities) are not permitted. Such
       adaptations may include the installation of ramps and grab-bars, widening of
       doorways, modification of bathroom facilities, or installation of specialized electric and
       plumbing systems, which are necessary to accommodate the medical equipment and
       supplies which are necessary for the welfare of the individual. Environmental
       modifications may also include consultation and assessments to determine the
       specific needs and follow-up inspections upon completion of the project. Excluded are
       those adaptations or improvements to the home, which are of general utility, and are
       not of direct medical or remedial benefit to the individual, such as carpeting, roof
       repair, central air conditioning, etc. Adaptations that add square footage to the home
       are excluded from this benefit. All services shall be provided in accordance with
       applicable State or local building codes. Approval of a request for environmental
       modification is a multi-step process. The modification is initially determined by the
       case manager based on the participant's need as documented in the plan of care.
       Three bids for the modification are obtained by the case manager and submitted with
       documentation of the need. The consultation/assessment does not require the
       submission of bids. This information is reviewed by SCDDSN staff for programmatic
       integrity and cost effectiveness. To the extent that any listed services are covered
       under the state plan, the services under the waiver would be limited to additional
       services not otherwise covered under the state plan, but consistent with waiver
       objectives of avoiding institutionalization.

Expanded Goods and Services

       Home Again provides expanded goods and services to assist participants in being
       prepared for the transition into the community. These services include furniture,
       appliances, groceries, security deposits, utility deposits, household items, and other
       non-covered items up to a cap of $6000 per participant.

Habilitation Services (Residential)

       Residential habilitation services include the care, skills training, and supervision
       provided to participants in a non-institutional setting. The degree and type of care,
       supervision, skills training, and support of participants will be based on the plan of
       service and the participant’s individual needs. Services include assistance with the
       following:
                                                                                                24
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                  July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                               Covered Services




       The acquisition, retention, or improvement of skills related to activities of daily living,
       such as:

           •   Personal grooming and cleanliness;

           •   Household chores and bed-making;

           •   Eating and preparation of food; and

           •   Social and adaptive skills necessary to enable the participant to reside in a
               non-institutional setting.

       Other than costs that are for modifications or adaptations to a facility required to
       assure the health and safety of residents or meet the requirements of the applicable
       life safety codes, payments for residential habilitation are not made for the following:

           •   Room and board;

           •   Costs of facility maintenance;

           •   Upkeep; and

           •   Improvement.

       Payments for residential habilitation do not include those made, directly or indirectly,
       to members of the participant’s immediate family. Payments will not be made for the
       routine care and supervision provided by a family or group home provider or for
       activities or supervision covered by a source other than Medicaid.

Health Education for Participant-Directed Care

       Health education for participant-directed care prepares capable individuals who desire
       to manage their own personal care or a family member or other responsible party who
       desires to manage the personal care of an individual not capable of self-management.

       Health education for participant-directed care is instruction provided by a licensed
       registered nurse who is provided the “Key to Independence Manual” from the
       Shepherd Center in Atlanta, Georgia and/or other curricula approved by
       SCDDSN/SCDHHS in the provision of this service. The training provided by an RN
       will regard the nature of specific medical conditions, the promotion of good health,
       and the prevention/monitoring of secondary medical conditions.

High Fidelity Wraparound

       High fidelity wraparound (HFW) is a team-based approach to caring for families with
       complicated needs. The function of performing wraparound facilitation is to identify
                                                                                                     25
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                 July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                              Covered Services




       who should be involved in producing a community-based, person-centered plan to
       meet the needs of the participant. Those identified family, extended family and other
       community members comprise the participant and family team and play a vital role in
       the development of the person-centered plan.

       The wraparound facilitator guides the person-centered plan development process,
       assures that waiver rules are followed and is responsible for reassembling the team
       when subsequent person-centered plan review and revision are needed.
       Reassembling happens with warranted changes in the participants’ circumstances.
       The wraparound facilitator emphasizes building collaboration and coordination among
       family-identified caretakers, service providers and other formal and informal
       community resources. The participant and family team meet with the wraparound
       facilitator to perform the four functions of home and community-based services
       (HCBS) care management: assessment, person-centered planning, referral to
       services and monitoring of health and welfare and service delivery. Wraparound
       coordination with other child serving systems should occur as needed. All
       coordination must be documented in the participant’s medical record. The high-fidelity
       entity must ensure that all participant and family team members adhere to the HCBS
       requirements found at 42 CFR 441.301(c).

       Participant and family teams receive regular clinical supervision by a Licensed
       Practitioner of the Healing Arts employed by the HFW entity. Wraparound coaches
       and trainers credentialed by the National Wraparound Implementation Center (NWIC)
       must be members of HFW teams. Further, HFW teams must demonstrate continued
       use of evidence-based wraparound standards as approved by SCDHHS through
       ongoing participation in wraparound fidelity monitoring.

       SCDHHS contracts solely with the COC to perform the HFW service. The COC
       implemented the wraparound model in 2014 and is the only provider of HFW in the
       state of South Carolina.

Home Delivered Meals

       Prepared meals sent to a participant's residence provide a minimum of one-third of
       the current recommended dietary allowance, but not comprising a full nutritional
       regimen. These can be hot, shelf-stable, refrigerator-fresh, or blast-frozen meals.

In-Home Support (Self-Directed)

       Care, supervision, teaching and/or assistance provided directly to or in support of the
       participant and provided in the participant's home, family home, the home of others,
       and/or in community settings. Community activities that originate from the home will
       be provided and billed as in-home support. These services are necessary to enable
       the person to live in the community by enhancing, maintaining, improving or
       decelerating the rate of regression of skills necessary to continue to live in the
       community.

       If the caregiver or participant incurs cost for vehicle operation to or from activities or
       other transportation costs, additional reimbursement beyond the payment of the

                                                                                                    26
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                               July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                            Covered Services




       hourly rate paid to the in-home support provider will not be made.

Independent Living Skills

       Services that develop, maintain and improve the community-living skills of a waiver
       participant. The service includes direct training from a qualified staff person to
       address the identified skill development needs of a waiver participant in the areas of:

                  a. communication skills;

                  b. community living and mobility;

                  c. interpersonal skills;

                  d. reduction/elimination of problem behavior;

                  e. self-care; and

                  f.   sensory/motor development involved in acquiring functional skills.

Individual Directed Goods and Supplies

       Individual directed goods and services are services, equipment or supplies not
       otherwise provided through this waiver or through the Medicaid State Plan that
       address an identified need in the person-centered plan in service of improving and
       maintaining the participant opportunities for full membership in the community.

       Individual directed goods and services must meet the following requirements: the item
       or service decreases the need for other Medicaid services; and/or promotes inclusion
       in the community; and/or increases the participant’s safety in the home environment;
       and funds to purchase the item or service is not available through another source.
       Experimental or prohibited treatments are excluded. Individual directed goods and
       services must be documented in the person-centered plan.

       The services under this waiver are limited to additional services not otherwise
       covered under the state plan, including EPSDT, but consistent with waiver objectives
       of avoiding institutionalization.

       The goods and services purchased under the authority must be documented and
       clearly linked to an assessed participant need established in the service plan.

Nurse Care Coordination

       For MCC participants, nurse care coordination is to assist participants in facilitating
       access to health services; promoting continuity of care; improving health,
       developmental, psychosocial and functional outcomes; maximizing efficient and
       effective use of resources; gaining access to skilled medical monitoring, and
       intervention to maintain the participant through home support.


                                                                                                 27
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                              July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                           Covered Services




              Minimum limits of:
                    Face-to-face - quarterly
                    Telephone contact - monthly

       Care advocate contact is contact by a professional who assists nurse care
       coordinators by facilitating access to health services and interventions to maintain the
       participant through home support.

Nursing Services

       Individual and continuous care (in contrast to part time or intermittent care) provided
       by licensed nurses within their scope of practice in the state’s Nurse Practice Act.
       These services are provided to a participant in their home. Continuous and individual
       skilled care is provided by a licensed registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse,
       under the supervision of a registered nurse, licensed in accordance with the state’s
       Nurse Practice Act, and in accordance with the participant's plan of care as deemed
       medically necessary by an authorized health care provider. Services are not allowable
       when a participant is in an institutional setting.

Occupational Therapy

       Occupational therapy is a treatment used to restore or improve fine motor functioning.

Pediatric Medical Day Care

       Services furnished on an hourly basis, or as specified in the person-centered service
       plan, in a licensed, integrated, community-based setting, encompassing both health
       and social services needed to ensure the optimal functioning of the participant. Meals
       provided as a part of these services shall not constitute a full nutritional regiment (3
       meals per day).

Peer Guidance for Participant-Directed Care

       Peer guidance for participant-directed care is information, advice, and encouragement
       provided by a peer to a participant with severe cognitive and/or severe physical
       impairment to recruit, train, and supervise caregivers.

Personal Care Services (PCS)

       Active, hands-on assistance in the performance of Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) or
       Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs) provided to the waiver participant in or
       outside their home. Personal care services can be provided on a continuing basis or
       on episodic occasions. Under no circumstances will any type of skilled medical
       service be performed by an aide.

Personal Emergency Response System (PERS)

       This service involves installation of the Personal Emergency Response System
                                                                                               28
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                    July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                 Covered Services




       (PERS). The unit must have three components: 1. small radio transmitter (a help
       button carried or worn by the user) 2. A console when emergency help (medical, fire,
       or police) is needed 3. Emergency Response Center to determine the nature of the
       calls. The service includes installation, participant instruction and maintenance of
       devices/systems. The service includes monitoring. The response center is staffed by
       trained professionals twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week

Pest Control Treatment and Advanced Pest Control

       Pest control includes services to remove pests, such as cockroaches, from
       participant's residence. Services are provided based on the demonstrated need to
       ensure participant's health, safety and welfare. Providers inspect participant’s
       residence, confirm existent pests, and treat the residence (interior and exterior) to
       eliminate infestation.

       Pest control-advanced services aid in maintaining an environment free of bed bugs to
       promote safety, sanitation, and cleanliness of the participant's residence. Once the
       existence of bedbugs is established in the home, providers treat the residence to
       eliminate infestation. The provider must return to the home and provide retreatment
       as necessary within a one-year warranty time frame from the authorization of initial
       treatment.

       Service does not include snakes, termites, or rodent removal.

Physical Therapy

       Physical therapy (PT) is a treatment to prevent, alleviate, or compensate for
       movement and/or mobility impairments, motor dysfunction, and related functional
       problems resulting from physical injury or illness. It uses physical agents, mechanical
       methods/devices, and other remedial treatments to restore or improve functioning.
       The service includes evaluation, therapy sessions, and consultation with caregivers or
       service providers. PT funded by HASCI waiver is an extended state plan service.

Private Vehicle Modifications

       Private vehicle modifications to a privately-owned vehicle is used to transport the
       participant (e.g. installation of a lift, tie downs, lowering the floor of the vehicle, raising
       the roof, etc.); limit of $7,500 per vehicle with a lifetime cap of 2 vehicles.

Private Vehicle Assessment/Consultation

       Private vehicle assessment/consultation is used to determine the specific
       modifications/equipment, any follow-up inspection after modifications is completed,
       and training in use of equipment for a private vehicle modification.

Psychological Services

       Psychological services address the affective, cognitive, and substance abuse
                                                                                                     29
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                               July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                            Covered Services




       problems of a HASCI waiver participant aged 21 years or older. This service includes
       psychiatric, psychological, and neuropsychological evaluation; development of
       treatment plans; participant/family counseling to address the participant’s affective,
       cognitive, and substance abuse problems; cognitive rehabilitation therapy; and
       alcohol/substance abuse counseling.

Respite (In-Home)

       Short-term services provided because a support person is absent or needs relief
       provided in a person's home or apartment when relieving the support person is the
       primary purpose of the service.

       For CC, in-home respite will not exceed two days in any given week and eight days in
       any given year.

Institutional Respite Care

       Short-term services provided because a support person is absent or needs relief.
       Services expressly are not provided in a person's home or apartment when relieving
       the support person is the primary purpose of the service.

       For CC, this service is limited to 28 days of respite per year outside of the home. Of
       those 28 days, no more than 14 days will be allowed in a hospital or nursing facility.

Respite Care in a Community Residential Care Facility

       Short-term services provided because a support person is absent or needs relief
       provided in a Community Residential Care Facility (CRCF) when relieving the support
       person is the primary purpose of the service.

       Total patient days allowed per fiscal year (July 1 – June 30) is twenty-eight (28). This
       includes any institutional respite days, if applicable.

Specialized Medical Equipment, Supplies and Assistive Technology

       Specialized medical equipment and supplies include: (a) devices, controls, or
       appliances, specified in the plan of care, that enable participants to increase their
       ability to perform activities of daily living; (b) devices, controls, or appliances that
       enable the participant to perceive, control, or communicate with the environment in
       which they live; (c) items necessary for life support or to address physical conditions
       along with ancillary supplies and equipment necessary to the proper functioning of
       such items; (d) such other durable and non-durable medical equipment not available
       under the state plan that is necessary to address participant functional limitations;
       and, (e) necessary medical supplies not available under the state plan. Items
       reimbursed with waiver funds are in addition to any medical equipment and supplies
       furnished under the state plan and exclude those items that are not of direct medical
       or remedial benefit to the participant. All items shall meet applicable standards of
       manufacture, design and installation. Items available in this service include nutritional

                                                                                                30
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                               July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                            Covered Services




       supplements and handheld shower.

       Providers must fill orders from their own inventory or contract with other companies
       for the purchase items necessary to fill the order. Providers must notify participants of
       warranty coverage and honor all warranties under applicable state law, and repair or
       replace free of charge SMA-covered items that are under warranty. In addition,
       providers must employ adequate staff to coordinate service delivery, package
       products according to service authorizations, and respond to complaints and
       grievances received from participants.

       This service is limited to additional services not otherwise covered under the state
       plan, including EPSDT, but consistent with waiver objectives of avoiding
       institutionalization.

Skilled Respite

       Respite services provided to participants unable to care for themselves and furnished
       on a short-term basis because of the absence or need for relief of those persons who
       normally provide care for the participant. Skilled respite services will be offered to
       those children needing skilled care undersigned physician orders. For skilled respite,
       either a RN or LPN may provide this service such as, checking vitals, administering
       medication and medical supervision. Unskilled respite services will be offered to those
       children with only unskilled care (ADL's and IADL's) needs provided by a personal
       care aide.

       The location(s) where respite care can be provided include, for example, the
       participant's home or private place of residence, the private residence of a respite
       care provider, a foster home, or a Medicaid certified hospital.

Specialized Medical Equipment, Supplies and Assistive Technology
Assessment/Consultation

       Specialized medical equipment, supplies, and assistive technology
       assessment/consultation may be provided (if not covered by Medicaid State Plan) to
       determine specific needs related to the participant’s disability for which specialized
       medical equipment and assistive technology will assist the participant to function
       more independently.

Speech and Hearing Services

       Speech and hearing services funded by the HASCI waiver is an extended state plan
       service. Speech and hearing services is a treatment to alleviate or compensate for
       speech and hearing impairments resulting from physical injury or illness. It includes
       the full range of activities provided by a licensed speech-language pathologist or a
       licensed audiologist. The service includes evaluation, development of therapeutic
       treatment plans, therapy sessions, training to use augmentative communication
       devices, and consultation with caregivers or service providers. Medicaid State Plan
       provides medically necessary private rehabilitative therapy and audiological services
       to children under age 21 years. This includes speech-language pathology services
                                                                                                31
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                               July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                            Covered Services




       and audiology services. The HASCI waiver makes the same benefits available to
       adults aged 21 years and older.

Support Center Services

       Support center services include non-medical care, supervision and assistance
       provided in a non-institutional, group setting outside of the participant’s home to
       individuals who, because of their disability, are unable to care for and supervise
       themselves. Services provided are necessary to prevent institutionalization and
       maintain the participant’s health and safety. The care, supervision and assistance will
       be provided in accordance with a plan of care. An array of non-habilitative activities
       and opportunities for socialization will be offered throughout the day but not as
       therapeutic goals. Activities can occur in natural settings that do not isolate
       participants from others without disabilities.

       Transportation will be provided from the individual’s residence to the service provision
       site when the service starts before 12:00 noon. Transportation will be available from
       the individual’s service provision site to his/her residence when the service start time
       is after 12:00 noon. The cost for transportation is included in the rate paid to the
       provider.

Transition Coordination

       Transition coordination is to provide assistance with the transition process to Home
       Again participants. The transition coordination service will support the participants to
       make a successful transition into the community. The transition coordination service
       will also ensure continued access to appropriate and available services for
       participants to remain in the community. Transition coordination is available as a
       Home Again grant funded service.

Tele-Monitoring

       Monitoring service utilizing technologies which measure and report the health status
       of at-risk waiver participants. This is done remotely by utilizing either existing
       telephone infrastructure or wireless communication technology in collecting and
       transmitting physiological data between the provider and participant. Monitoring is the
       primary purpose of this service. Remote monitoring will assist the individual to fully
       integrate into the community, participate in community activities, and avoid isolation.

       Participants receiving the telemonitoring service must have a primary care physician
       that approves the use of the telemonitoring service and is solely responsible for
       receiving and acting upon the information received via the telemonitoring service.

       Telemonitoring equipment located in the participant’s home must, at a minimum, be
       an FDA Class II Hospital grade medical device that includes a computer/monitor that
       is programmable for a variety of disease states and for rate and frequency. The
       equipment must have a digital scale that measures accurately to at least 400 lbs. that
       is adaptable to fit a glucometer and a blood pressure cuff. All installed equipment
       must be able to measure, at a minimum, blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen
                                                                                                  32
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                              July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                           Covered Services




       saturation, blood glucose, and body weight. Telephones, facsimile machines, and
       electronic mail systems do not meet the requirements of the definition of
       telemonitoring but may be utilized as a component of the telemonitoring system. As
       communication of data occurs at scheduled daily "appointment times" and the
       information collected/sent is neither visible to others or remains stored on the device,
       the participant maintains constant control of their personal information within the
       residential environment.

Unskilled Respite

       In-home respite services provide temporary care in the home for Medically Complex
       Children and PCSC waiver participants living at home and cared for by their families
       or other informal support systems. These services maintain participants and provide
       temporary relief for the primary caregivers.




                                                                                               33
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                         July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                              Utilization Management




6 UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT
For general policies regarding Program Integrity, Utilization Management, Fraud, Waste and Abuse
providers must refer to the Provider Administrative and Billing Manual.

Prior Authorization

   Authorization of Services

       Services must be prior authorized by the case manager or care coordinator based on the
       participant’s plan of service. Prior authorizations are required for all waiver services. For
       SCDHHS operated services, authorization will be transmitted to the provider by the
       completion of an SCDHHS Service Provision Form (DHHS Form 175). Accompanying the
       authorization will be a copy of the plan of service and, if appropriate, a copy of the
       physician’s order.

       (For an example of this form, please see the Forms information located on the provider
       portal.) For SCDDSN-operated waiver services, authorization will be transmitted through
       Therap.

   Participant Choice of Providers

       SCDHHS-operated waiver participants are required to choose a service provider from a
       Service Provider Report, which lists available providers of each service for the participant’s
       waiver of participation. The Participant Choice of Provider(s) Form will identify the referring
       entity and SCDHHS provider(s) already involved in the care of the participant. The following
       services require a preferred provider to participate in a bid process and are excluded from
       this policy: Environmental modifications, ramps, vehicle modifications. For bid process
       services, the provider submitting the lowest bid will be awarded the referral. If the provider
       submitting the lowest bid cannot provide the service, the referral will be awarded to the next
       lowest bidder.

   Authorization Periods

       Authorizations will be issued for all SCDHHS and SCDDSN services indicating the beginning
       date of the service, the days of the week that the service will be provided, and the number of
       units of service to be provided. Frequency varies depending on the type of service. Please
       see scope of service for authorization guidelines for each service. The hours of service will
       be indicated only if specific times are essential to meeting the participant’s service needs.
       For SCDHHS personal care and companion services, the authorization will designate that
       the service is to be provided during the morning, afternoon, or evening. If the authorization
       indicates multiple times of day this indicates that the participant requires services more than
       one time a day. The authorization period ending date may or may not be indicated on the
       service provision form. Authorizations without an ending date will be valid until a revised
       service provision form is issued to the provider.
                                                                                                          34
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                          July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                               Utilization Management




   Changes in Services Within an Authorization Period

       If the participant’s needs change during an authorization period, a revised service provision
       form will be sent to the provider. Changes in frequency of a particular service do not require
       a new physician’s order.

   Interruption of Services

       Previously authorized services will be placed on hold if the participant enters a hospital or
       institution for a temporary stay or temporarily chooses not to receive services. The
       interruption of services does not require a revised service provision form unless the service
       is to be interrupted for a full calendar month.

   Termination of Authorized Services

       Service must be officially terminated whenever it is determined that the participant no longer
       requires an authorized service, becomes either medically or financially ineligible or has not
       received a service within thirty (30) days. Both the participant and the provider must be
       notified of the termination of services. This verbal notification must be followed with a written
       confirmation of termination of the service.

   Prior Authorization for Hospice Participants

       In certain situations, Medicaid beneficiaries receiving the State Plan hospice benefit may
       receive some waiver services. Prior authorization by the hospice provider is required in
       cases where waiver services are authorized for Medicaid hospice beneficiaries. The prior
       authorization number must be placed on the claim for the provider to receive reimbursement.
       The case manager obtains the prior authorization number from the hospice provider and
       gives it to the provider of the authorized service. Providers submitting hard copy CMS-1500
       claims must place the prior authorization number in field 19. Providers submitting claims
       electronically by diskette or magnetic tapes will place the prior authorization number in field
       10. Providers who receive the 976 edit (hospice beneficiary/service requires prior approval)
       may resolve the edit by submitting a new claim with the corrected information.

       For specific information regarding DDSN waiver services, please see https://ddsn.sc.gov/.




                                                                                                           35
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                     July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                      Reporting and Documentation




7 REPORTING/DOCUMENTATION
       General policies for Medicaid beneficiaries’ health records requirements and documentation
       are detailed in the Provider Administrative and Billing Manual. In addition to the general
       policies, HCBS providers must comply with specific policies for participant and employee
       records requirements and documentation in their Scopes and Standards.

HIPAA Confidentiality Requirements

       Providers must maintain records per the HIPAA Confidentiality Requirements as outlined in
       the Administrative and Billing Manual. Records must be maintained in a secure manner to
       ensure the maintenance of confidentiality.

Signature Policy

       The signature of the provider rendering or authorizing the services may be handwritten,
       electronic or digital. Stamped signatures are unacceptable. For acceptable electronic
       signatures, refer to the SCDHHS Provider Administrative and Billing Manual, section
       “Electronic Signatures”.

Electronic Record Keeping

       Providers can utilize electronic record keeping methods. Providers must ensure that they
       utilize a backup storage system. The provider must also ensure that all scopes requirements
       can be met in the electronic record-keeping system.

Mandatory Reporter

       In accordance with the S. C. Code of Laws, § 43-35-25, HCBS providers and their staff are
       mandatory reporters of abuse, neglect or exploitation of vulnerable adults. Allegations must
       be reported to the South Carolina Department of Social Services (SCDSS) within twenty-four
       (24) hours or within the next business day of receipt of the allegation or of witnessing the
       abuse, neglect or exploitation. Reports must be made in writing, or orally by telephone or
       otherwise.

       HCBS providers and their staff are also mandatory reporters of abuse, neglect, or
       exploitation of children when in a professional capacity under S.C. Code of Laws, § 63-7-
       310. HCBS providers and their staff must report any information received that suggests the
       following:

           •   The reporter believes a child has been or may be abused or neglected as defined in
               § 63-7-20

           •   The reporter believes a child’s physical or mental health or welfare has been or may
               be adversely affected by acts or omissions considered to be child abuse or neglect if
               committed by a responsible party (parent, guardian, or other person responsible for
                                                                                                      36
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                     July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                      Reporting and Documentation




               the child’s welfare), but the acts or omission were committed by a person other than
               a responsible party. The reporter must notify the appropriate law enforcement
               agency.

       Reports of child abuse or neglect may be made orally by telephone or otherwise to the
       Department of Social Services county office or to a law enforcement agency in the county
       where the child resides or is found.




                                                                                                      37
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES MANUAL                                                       July 1, 2024
SOUTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                   Billing Guidance




8 BILLING GUIDANCE
Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) and Phoenix Billing Procedures and Service
Monitoring

       The provider must agree to participate in all components of SCDHHS’ Electronic Visit
       Verification (EVV) system or Phoenix monitoring and payment system when providing
       services for participants of the CC, HIV/AIDS, Vent, and MCC waivers. The EVV system is
       an automated system used for service documentation and Medicaid Management
       Information System (MMIS) billing. Phoenix is a system that is used for service monitoring,
       web-based reporting, and billing to MMIS.

       For monitoring of service delivery and reporting, real-time reports allow providers, case
       managers, and/or nurses to monitor participants more closely to ensure receipt of services.
       The EVV system generates electronic billing to MMIS for services provided 6 days a week.
       Only authorized services and the total units provided (up to the maximum
       authorization) are submitted to MMIS for payment. If resolutions are submitted for billing
       through Phoenix, they must be uploaded in Phoenix within 2 weeks of service delivery to
       receive payment without a worker strike per the Strike Policy. This billing ensures accuracy
       of claim processing.

       SCDHHS reserves the right to perform onsite reviews during normal business hours to
       ensure compliance with policies and procedures.

Medicaid Web-based Claim Submission Tool Billing Procedures

       The ID/RD, CS and HASCI waivers currently do not require the use of the EVV billing system
       and claims may be submitted electronically via the South Carolina Medicaid Web-based
       Claim Submission Tool.

       Providers will be required to bill claims on this website in a timely manner. Claims, at a
       minimum, must be entered into the website within the quarter after the date of service. In all
       cases, services documented are compared with prior authorizations in the system to
       determine if the services were provided appropriately. Claims rejected for payment must be
       resubmitted through the local SCDHHS area office.

       For additional information regarding billing please see the following:

       Strike Policy

       Medicaid Web Tool Training




                                                                                                        38
