South Carolina Department and Disabilities
Processing List Procedures for Waiver Applicants                                  July 1, 2024


       I.      Processing List Procedures for Waiver Applicants

               Applicants who seek entrance into the waiver are screened for financial
               eligibility for the waiver. Applicants not deemed financially eligible are placed
               on a processing list until financial eligibility has been determined. The following
               procedures are to be used in the processing and maintenance of the Processing List
               for waiver applicants whose application is for Community Choices or HIV/AIDS
               Waivers. Procedures governing all other applications are set forth in the CLTC
               Policy and Procedure Manual. The Procedures herein will encompass activities
               beginning with referral/application processing and ending with waiver enrollment.

      II.     Application Processing


                All Community Choices and HIV/AIDS waiver applicants are assigned to the
                Processing List once the referral is processed.

        Application Process:

               A.    For all applicants with Category 80, 86, 16, 54, 17, 18, 19, 33, 10, or 15,
               CentralizedIntake releases the application to the Area Office. Phoenix will auto-
               assign the application to a Nurse Consultant overnight.


               B.     For all applicants with a Payment Category other than 80, 86, 16, 54, 17, 18,
               19, 33, 10, or 15 the application is maintained in Centralized Intake until financial
               eligibility is determined by Medicaid Eligibility. If Eligibility Workflow states
               approved, the application is released to the Area Office.
               Phoenix will auto-assign the application to a Nurse Consultant overnight. If
               Eligibility Workflow states denied, the application is terminated by Centralized
               Intake. The Centralized Intake will notify the applicant and/or authorized
               representative of termination from the Processing List via CLTC Notification
               Form 171. The reason for termination, financial ineligibility, will be indicated in
               the comment section of the form. The ten (10) day notice and Appeals Notice are not
               required.




Appendix III – Processing List                                                               Page 1
 South Carolina Department and Disabilities
 Processing List Procedures for Waiver Applicants                                          July 1, 2024
       C.            For all applicants without current Medicaid eligibility, no payment category, the
                     application is maintained in Centralized Intake until financial eligibility is determined
                     by Medicaid Eligibility. If Eligibility Workflow states approved, the application is
                     released to the Area Office. Phoenix will auto-assign the application to a Nurse
                     Consultant overnight. If Eligibility Workflow states denied, the application is
                     terminated by Centralized Intake.       Centralized Intake willnotify the applicant
                     and/or authorized representative of termination from the Processing List via CLTC
                     Notification Form 171. The reason for termination, financial ineligibility, will be
                     indicated in the comment section of the form. The ten (10) day notice and the
                     Appeals Notice are not required.


III.   Waiting List Requirements during Enrollment Cap

                 During times of budgetary constraints, restrictions in program enrollment or
                 limitations on the number of persons that may be served by this program may be
                 necessary. A waiting list will be maintained for applicants who have applied for
                 enrollment. Applicants who are on the waiting list will be enrolled when a waiver
                 slot becomes available, based on an assessment of medical need and urgency of
                 waiver services. Applicants are issued a priority score based on that assessment.
                 Applicants are prioritized on the waiting list by his/her priority score. In the event
                 two or more are assessed to have the same priority score, the date and time of
                 application will determine who is offered the next available waiver slot.

            A.       Waiting List Priority Levels

                 •     Priority 1
                       Incomplete assessment

                 •     Priority 2
                       Initial Phone or In-home assessment (complete or incomplete)
                       Level of care is Medically Ineligible

                 •     Priority 3
                       Historical references – no longer used.

                 •     Priority 5
                       No assessment
                       Medicaid eligibility is NOT verified




 Appendix III – Processing List                                                                       Page 2
South Carolina Department and Disabilities
Processing List Procedures for Waiver Applicants                                           July 1, 2024

             •    Priority 7
                  No assessment
                  Medicaid eligibility IS verified

             •    Priority 8
                  Assessment completed
                  Level of Care is Skilled or Intermediate
                  Medicaid Eligibility is NOT verified

             •    Priority 9
                  Assessment completed
                  Level of Care is Skilled or Intermediate
                  Medicaid Eligibility IS verified

             •    Priority 10
                  Initial phone or In-home assessment complete
                  Level of Care is Skilled or Intermediate
                  Medicaid Eligibility is NOT verified

             •    Priority 12
                  Initial phone or In-home assessment complete
                  Level of Care is Skilled or Intermediate
                  Medicaid Eligibility IS verified
                  Ready for enrollment

        B.       Individuals Subject to Waiting List Requirements and Intake Criteria

                 1.      Normal Intake Criteria

                 Once application has been processed, it will be placed on the Waiting List until all intake
                 criteria have been met.




Appendix III – Processing List                                                                         Page 3
South Carolina Department and Disabilities
Processing List Procedures for Waiver Applicants                                 July 1, 2024
              2.      Terminated Participant Re-applying

            Any applicant who was previously terminated and is re-applying for waiver enrollment
            must be processed according to current Waiting List procedures. (Note: See Section III
            A. for exception)

              3.      Applicant on More Than One Waiver’s Waiting List
            An applicant may simultaneously be placed and remain on more than one waiver’s
            Waiting List. The applicant must choose which waiver they wish to be enrolled in if
            they are awarded a waiver slot.

            4.      Other Applicant
          Including those cited in 1, 2, 3 above, any applicant (other than an exempted
          applicant specified in Section III) will be subject to Waiting List requirements.
C. Individuals Exempt from Waiting List Requirements

              1.      Transfer from Mechanical Ventilator Waiver

            A Mechanical Ventilator Waiver participant who becomes ineligible for the waiver
            due to discontinued need for the mechanical ventilator or desires to seek Community
            Choices or HIV/AIDS waiver may immediately be enrolled in the Community Choices
            or HIV/AIDS waiver if the individual meets the waiver’s level of care criteria.


              2.      Transfer from HIV/AIDS Waiver

            A HIV/AIDS waiver participant who becomes ineligible for the HIV/AIDS waiver or
            desires to seek Community Choices waiver may immediately by enrolled in the
            Community Choices waiver if the individual meets the nursing facility level of care
            and                             financial                               eligibility.

              3.      Transfer from Community Choices Waiver

            A Community Choices waiver participant who becomes ineligible for the Community
            Choices waiver or desires to seek HIV/AIDS waiver may immediately be enrolled in
            the HIV/AIDS waiver if the individual meets the waiver level of care and financial
            eligibility.

              4.      Transfer from PACE

            A PACE participant who becomes ineligible for the waiver due to discontinued need
            for PACE or desires to seek Community Choices or HIV/AIDS waiver may
            immediately be enrolled in the Community Choices or HIV/AIDS waiver if the
            individual meets the waiver level of care and financial eligibility.
Appendix III – Processing List                                                             Page 4
South Carolina Department and Disabilities
Processing List Procedures for Waiver Applicants                                 July 1, 2024


              5.      Transfer from Medically Complex Children

            A Medically Complex Children waiver participant who becomes ineligible for the
            MCC waiver or desires to seek Community Choices or HIV/AIDS waiver may
            immediately be enrolled in the Community Choices or HIV/AIDS waiver if the
            individual meets the waiver level of care and financial eligibility.

           6. Participant Temporarily Exiting the Program for Other Care (Full Calendar
              Month)

            An active Community Choices or HIV/AIDS waiver participant may enter any
            hospital, nursing facility, or medical institution for treatment, rehabilitation, non-
            waiver respite care or acute care. During the period of institutionalization, not to
            exceed on full calendar month, the participant’s case may remain open to the waiver
            with restriction as set forth in the Community Choices Policy and Procedure section
            05.40. The participant’s waiver application must be closed no later than close of
            business on the last day of the full calendar month. Planned temporary stay
            subsequently, in accordance with Chapter 5 Section 05.40 of the Community Choices
            Policy and Procedure Manual, the individual may re-enroll in the waiver after both
            financial and level of care determination have been established.

              7.      Organ Transplantation Participant

            Applicant or participant being considered for organ transplantation or having received
            an organ transplant whose eligibility and continued medical treatment are contingent
            upon waiver enrollment may be exempt from the Processing List dependent on the
            approval of the Central Office Designee.

              8.      Previous Participant Financially Ineligible for Not More Than One Month

            A participant who loses financial eligibility for Medicaid for not more than one (1)
            month due to excess resources, lump sum payment and so forth, shall be exempt from
            processing list requirements when applying for re-enrollment in the program. The
            participant may be immediately re-entered into the program after both financial and
            medical eligibility have been re-established.

              9.     Occupant of Nursing Home Bed for Ninety (90) or More Days and at
              Least the Last Day Under Medicaid Sponsorship

            A Medicaid sponsored individual who has resided in a South Carolina Medicaid
            contracted nursing home bed for ninety (90) or more days and at least the last day
            under Medicaid sponsorship, is not subject to the Processing List. If the individual is
            discharged to the community and chooses to receive waiver services, the individual
Appendix III – Processing List                                                              Page 5
      South Carolina Department and Disabilities
      Processing List Procedures for Waiver Applicants                                 July 1, 2024
                  will immediately be entered into the program after medical eligibility has been re-
                  determined, financial eligibility verified, and other waiver admission requirements
                  fulfilled. For this to occur, CLTC must have been made aware of, and involved in, the
                  plans for discharge to the community to ensure that appropriate community services
                  can be provided to the individual without interruption. For MAO applicants,
                  Medicaid eligibility is contingent on not more than a ten (10) day break in services.
                      Note: For purposes of computing ninety (90) consecutive days, a
                      combination of the listed institutions (defined as a South Carolina Medicaid
                      contracted nursing home, swing bed, administrative day bed, or acute
                      hospital bed) may be used; however, the applicant’s vendor payment must
                      be Medicaidupon discharge.

                    10.     Occupant of Swing Bed, Administrative Day, or Acute Hospital Bed

                  A Medicaid-sponsored individual who is seeking nursing home placement, no longer
                  requires acute care, and no bed is available and is residing in a Swing Bed,
                  Administrative Day, or Acute Hospital Bed is not subject to the Processing List. If the
                  individual is discharged to the community and wishes to receive waiver services, the
                  individual will be immediately enrolled in the waiver after medically eligibility has
                  been re-determined, financial eligibility verified, and other waiver admission
                  requirements fulfilled. For this to occur, CLTC must have been made aware of, and
                  involved in, the plans for discharge to the community to ensure that appropriate
                  community services can be provided to the applicant without interruption. For MAO
                  participants, Medicaid eligibility is contingent on not more than a ten (10) day break
                  in service.

                    11.     Transfer from Children’s Personal Care Service Program

                  A Children’s Personal Care Service participant between the ages of 18 and 21 who
                  requires other waiver services may immediately be enrolled into the Community
                  Choices or HIV/AIDS waiver if the individual is medically and financially eligible
                  without regards to the Processing List.

IV.   Waiting List Maintenance

              CLTC Centralized Intake will maintain the Waiting List accurately. Applications will be
              closed utilizing the correct termination reason when appropriate. This action is necessary
              to maintain both accuracy and consistency. It should be remembered that Waiting List
              data is utilized by various parties for planning and other statistics and purposes.
              Information received from Eligibility Workflow should be acted on promptly.

              If a nursing home application is being processed for a waiver applicant on the processing
              list, the Nurse Consultant assigned to the nursing home application will determine if it is
              appropriate for the applicant to remain on the waiver Waiting List. If the nursing home
      Appendix III – Processing List                                                              Page 6
South Carolina Department and Disabilities
Processing List Procedures for Waiver Applicants                                 July 1, 2024
        placement is expected to be long term or the applicant and/or authorized representative
        decline participation in the waiver, the Nurse Consultant will terminate the waiver
        application. If an applicant on the Waiting List is determined to be financially ineligible
        due to Eligibility Workflow being denied, a CLTC Notification Form 171 will be sent to
        the applicant to notify of the termination from the Processing List. A ten (10) day notice
        or an Appeal Notice is not required.




Appendix III – Processing List                                                              Page 7
