Device ID Self-Registration
AuthentiCare® 3.0



                                                                                                                               Last Updated: 3/16/2026
© 2025 First Data Government Solutions/Fiserv. All Rights Reserved. All trademarks, service marks and trade names referenced in this material are the property of their
respective owners.
Document Version: 10.11, Revision Date: 01/21/2026.
                                                                                        AuthentiCare® 3.0 - Device ID Self-Registration


Welcome to AuthentiCare 3.0!
Please follow the below instructions to get logged into the new mobile application.

      1. Open your AuthentiCare 3.0 mobile app and enter your Worker ID & Password.


      2. Click ‘Sign In.’




             If you have a valid email address on file with AuthentiCare, upon entering your credentials,
             you will receive a message on the app screen indicating a new device has been detected.



© 2026 First Data Government Solutions/Fiserv. All Rights Reserved. All trademarks, service marks and trade names referenced in this material are the property of their
respective owners.                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                        AuthentiCare® 3.0 - Device ID Self-Registration


      3. Click ‘Continue’ to receive a new PIN via email to authenticate your device.




             After clicking ‘Continue,’ you will receive a second automated email to the email
             address on the worker profile that has a six-digit PIN.




      4. You will need to enter the six-digit PIN from the automated email into the app screen and
         click ‘Submit.’




© 2026 First Data Government Solutions/Fiserv. All Rights Reserved. All trademarks, service marks and trade names referenced in this material are the property of their
respective owners.                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                        AuthentiCare® 3.0 - Device ID Self-Registration




             Upon clicking ‘Submit’ with the new PIN, the system will associate your current device ID
             with your worker profile.

             Additionally, an automated e-mail confirming the change will be sent to the official email
             address tied to your worker profile.




      5. You will need to choose whether you want to enable biometric login, or you can click
         ‘Cancel.’




© 2026 First Data Government Solutions/Fiserv. All Rights Reserved. All trademarks, service marks and trade names referenced in this material are the property of their
respective owners.                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                        AuthentiCare® 3.0 - Device ID Self-Registration


             Upon completing these steps, you will be directed to the landing page to establish a
             session in AuthentiCare 3.0.




             NOTE: Entering the beginning of a client's last name will return all results that begin with
             an exact match of those letters. For example, to look for a client with a last name of “Smith”,
             it is possible to enter “Smi”, “Smit”, etc.


                        IMPORTANT REMINDER: Upon migration to the 3.0 application, users
                        will no longer be able to access the 2.0 application, even with a valid
                        Worker ID and Password credentials (see screenshot below).




Please reach out to your provider agency contact for any questions or challenges.


© 2026 First Data Government Solutions/Fiserv. All Rights Reserved. All trademarks, service marks and trade names referenced in this material are the property of their
respective owners.                                                                                                                                                        5
