                                   What is a grievance?
                                   A grievance is an official complaint concerning waiver services. SCDHHS
                                   is responsible for operating the complaint system. Complaints may in-
                                   clude dissatisfaction with a provider, a course of treatment, or how
Grievances                         something is administered.




Who should I contact if I have a concern?
Complaints can be reported by contacting the wrapa-
round facilitator or SCDHHS waiver staff . If the complaint
concerns one of these entities, the family member or youth should report it to one of the alternative parties.
All complaints must be submitted in writing and will not be addressed until a written statement is received.

What happens after a grievance is received?
If the complaint is received by the wraparound facilitator, a supervisor will investigate and schedule a
meeting to address the concerns of the family member or youth. If SCDHHS waiver staff receives the griev-
ance, waiver staff will investigate and schedule a meeting to address concerns of the family member or
youth.

How are grievances resolved?
Complaints resolved during a meeting will be acknowledged in writing and documented in the youth’s record
at SCDHHS. Unsatisfactory outcomes may be appealed by writing to the SCDHHS waiver director.
Assistance is available to family members or youth during this process. SCDHHS must issue a written decision
within 10 days of receiving the complaint.

What if I am dissatisfied with the decision?
Complaints regarding services being provided to children by
a state agency can be submitted to South Carolina
Department of Children’s Advocacy (DCA) at:
https://childadvocate.sc.gov/submit-complaint
                                      What is the purpose of an appeal?
                                      The purpose of an appeal is to allow someone to question an adverse
                                      action or adverse determination of a final agency decision. An adverse
                                      action includes termination, suspension or reduction of waiver or Medi-
    Appeals                           caid state plan services on a youth’s plan of care. An adverse determina-
                                      tion includes denial of entry into the waiver. A final agency decision is
                                      the completion of the decision making process.




When can someone request an appeal?
An appeal can be requested if the family member or youth:
A) is not given the choice of home and community based
     services as an alternative to institutional care;
B) is denied a service or provider of choice (when available);
or,
C) has services denied, suspended, reduced or terminated.

What is included in an appeal request?
•    A copy of the notification of denial received from SCDHHS regarding the specific matter on appeal
•    A specific statement identifying which issue is being appealed
•    A description of how the family member or youth will receive status updates on the appeal request

What is the timeline for submitting an appeal?
To avoid interruption of waiver services, an appeal must be submitted within 10 calendar days of the date
the written notification of the adverse decision was mailed. If the appeal is denied , the family member or
youth may be required to pay for services during the appeal period. Otherwise, an appeal must be submitted
within 30 calendar days from the date the notification was mailed.

                                   Where can appeals be submitted?
    Online at:                                                   Mailed to:
    https://msp.scdhhs.gov/appeals/site-page/file-appeal         Division of Appeals and Hearings
                                                                 SC Department of Health and Human Services
    Faxed to:                                                    PO Box 8206
    (803)-255-8206                                               Columbia, SC 29202-8206
                                                    *******
        Complaints regarding services being provided to children by a state agency can be submitted to
        SC Department of Children’s Advocacy (DCA) at: https://childadvocate.sc.gov/submit-complaint
