                      Palmetto Coordinated System of Care Waiver Information Sheet
                                South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services

  The state of South Carolina developed the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care (PCSC) for South Carolina’s youth with
  significant behavioral health challenges or co-occurring conditions who are in, in or at imminent risk of, out-of-home
  placement. PCSC is an evidence-based approach that is part of a national movement to develop family-driven and youth-
  guided care and keep youth at home, in school, and out of the child welfare and juvenile justice systems. The approved
  §1915(b)(4) and §1915(c) federal waivers allow the South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services (SCDHHS) to
  collaborate with the SC Continuum of Care (COC) to support the PCSC’s goal for youth and families to receive services,
  when needed, that are designed to help participants achieve safe, healthy, and functional lives as successful, responsible, and
  productive citizens.

                    PCSC Waiver Participation                                   Applying for PCSC Waiver Services

 To participate in the PCSC Waiver, a person must:                  To apply for PCSC waiver services, a person should:
 ✓ Be diagnosed with a primary behavioral health                    ✓ Contact the COC in your area at
   diagnosis or co-occurring condition;                               http://coc.sc.gov/contact.html.
 ✓ Be eligible to receive Medicaid or already qualify for           ✓ Inform your local COC representative that you wish to
   Medicaid;                                                          apply for the PCSC waiver. They will work with you
 ✓ Require the degree of care that would be provided in an            to gather the information needed to complete the
   institutional setting; therefore, meet hospital Level of           application.
   Care criteria;                                                           o    You will receive a written response from COC
 ✓ Be given the option of receiving services in his/her                          regarding your PCSC waiver application.
   home and community or in an institution and choose to
   receive services in his/her home and community;
 ✓ Have needs that can be met by the PCSC waiver;
 ✓ Be allocated a waiver slot; and,
 ✓ Be informed of the alternatives covered by the PCSC
   waiver, elect to receive PCSC waiver services and
   choose among qualified providers.



                                                   PCSC Waiver Termination

 PCSC waiver enrollment is terminated when the participant:
 ✓ Is admitted for institutional care*;
 ✓ No longer meets hospital level of care;
 ✓ Voluntarily withdraws or no longer wishes to receive services funded by the PCSC waiver;
 ✓ Does not receive a PCSC waiver service for 30 consecutive days*; or,
 ✓ Moves out-of-state.
 *some exclusions apply.


                                                Your Person-Centered Annual Plan

  An annual plan of services and supports must be completed within 365 days of the previous plan. If your new plan is not
  completed by the 364th day, Medicaid cannot pay for your services that were provided. Please work with your High Fidelity
  Wraparound Facilitator to make sure that your plan is completed at least once every year.




PCSC Info Sheet-1 (09/2020)
                                                       PCSC Waiver Services

  PCSC waiver services must be supported by a specific assessed need and justified in the person-centered plan. The services under
  this waiver are limited to additional services not otherwise covered under the state plan, including Early and Periodic Screening,
  Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT), but consistent with waiver objectives of avoiding institutionalization. The following services
  are available through the PCSC waiver:

  •    High-Fidelity Wraparound: An evidence-based model which includes intensive service coordination to provide home and
       community-based supports and services to youth with mental illness who would otherwise be served in inpatient general and
       psychiatric hospitals. Families and youth are offered the choice of behavioral health services and supports to permit the youth
       to remain in, or return to, the lease restrictive environment, preferably their homes. To be eligible, a potential waiver youth
       must meet the inpatient level of care and meet all Medicaid financial and COC requirements.

  •    Respite: A face-to-face service that is provided on a short-term, planned or emergency basis, and offers relief to a
       beneficiary’s unpaid or principal caregiver who is unavailable to provide support to the youth. Respite may be provided in an
       emergency to prevent hospitalization. Respite can be no longer than one week per episode, and not more than 21 days per
       year. Respite stays of greater than 72 hours require prior authorization. Youth requiring crisis respite for longer periods may
       be evaluated on an individual basis.

  •    Individual Directed Goods and Services: Services, equipment or supplies not otherwise provided through this waiver or
       through the Medicaid state plan that address an identified need in the person-centered plan (including improving and
       maintaining the participant’s opportunities for full membership in the community) and meet the following requirements: the
       item or service would decrease the need for other Medicaid services; AND/OR promote inclusion in the community; AND/OR
       increase the participant’s safety in the home environment; AND the participant does not have the funds to purchase the item or
       service or the item or service is not available through another source. Experimental or prohibited treatments are excluded.
       Individual Directed Goods and Services must be documented in the person-centered plan. There is a lifetime cap of $2,000.00
       for each participant.




PCSC Info Sheet-1 (09/2020)
