                PCSC WAIVER ENROLLMENT GUIDANCE
                Waiver Enrollment Process and Procedures – At-A-Glance
COC responsibilities are in orange. SCDHHS responsibilities are in blue.

   Initiate       Create          Add         Perform       Conduct        Update         Verify        Enroll
 INITIATE       CREATE        ADD            PERFORM       CONDUCT       UPDATE         VERIFY        ENROLL
 Brief          HFW and       applicant      Intake        Level of      HFW and        waiver        applicant
 Screener       PCSC apps     to             activities    Care          PCSC apps      criteria      in waiver
 COC            COC           Waiting        COC           COC           COC            info          SCDHHS
 (Phoenix)      (Phoenix)                    (Phoenix)                                  SCDHHS        (MMIS)
                              List                         (Phoenix)     (Phoenix)      (Phoenix)
                              COC
                              (Phoenix)                                                 If DSS
                                                                                        involved
                                                                                        notify DSS



General Rules and Roles
Continuum of Care staff perform all waiver eligibility tasks to determine if
applicants meet waiver eligibility criteria. Criteria include the following:
    • COC agency criteria
        o This includes consents, authorizations, application, etc.
    • Waiver targeting criteria
        o Financial eligibility (verified by SCDHHS)
        o Primary Behavioral Health diagnosis or behaviors consistent with a
            Behavioral Health diagnosis
        o Age – applicants must be under age 21
        o Level of care – CASII Assessment
    • Required uploads (includes Waiver Consent, provisional plan of care, etc.)

The work and programs of the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care are guided by the following Core Values: family
driven and youth guided; home and community based; strengths based and individualized; culturally and linguistically
competent; coordinated across systems and services; connected to natural helping networks; data driven and outcome
oriented; and trauma-informed. Visit https://scdhhs.gov/pcsc to learn more about the Palmetto Coordinated System of
Care.
When it is determined an applicant meets the criteria above, a COC Phoenix User
changes the status of the PCSC application in Phoenix to “Participating”. Once the
status is changed to “Participating” PCSC Staff begin the SCDHHS waiver
enrollment review process. Formal enrollment is complete when PCSC staff
assigns the PCSC RSP (Recipient Special Program) identifier to the member record
in MMIS.
Phoenix Tasks
The following steps are completed by PCSC Staff:
    • Log in to Phoenix
    • Navigate to the “No RSP/ Participating” screen from the PCSC Dashboard
         o The “No RSP/Participating” screen includes all youth with a
             “Participating” PCSC application status that do not have the PCSC RSP
             assigned to their record in MMIS
         o COC is not able to submit a waiver claim until PCSC staff assigns the
             PCSC RSP in MMIS
    • Access each youth/client record on this screen
         o Navigate to “PCSC Participant” on the carousel
                ▪ Navigate to the “Waiver Status Changes” tab (far right) to
                    determine the following (each of these conditions must be
                    met BEFORE the RSP can be assigned in MMIS):
                        • “CASII: Recommended for Waiver” date should be less
                            than or equal to the “Participating in PCSC” date
                        • “Participating in HFW” date should be less than or equal
                            to the “Participating in PCSC” date
                ▪ Navigate to the “Custody Placement” tab to ensure the youth
                    is in an approved home-like setting
The work and programs of the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care are guided by the following Core Values: family
driven and youth guided; home and community based; strengths based and individualized; culturally and linguistically
competent; coordinated across systems and services; connected to natural helping networks; data driven and outcome
oriented; and trauma-informed. Visit https://scdhhs.gov/pcsc to learn more about the Palmetto Coordinated System of
Care.
                      ▪




    • When the conditions above are met, navigate to the “Applications” tab on
      the carousel
         o The PCSC application status should be “Participating”; the
            corresponding date will be the assignment date of the PCSC RSP in
            MMIS
    • Before exiting Phoenix, navigate to “Participant Information” on the
      carousel
         o Navigate to the “General Information” tab (far right) to determine
            the Medicaid ID number for the youth; this number will be used to
            search the applicant in MMIS
                          ----PCSC Staff activity in Phoenix ends----
MMIS Tasks
When PCSC staff determines the youth/applicant meets waiver enrollment
criteria the following steps are taken:
    •   Log in to MMIS
    •   Enter the recipient Medicaid Number
    •   Navigate to the RSP Update Screen
    •   Add the date that appears on the Phoenix – Applications tab as referenced
        in the highlighted section above.
                            ---PCSC Staff activity in MMIS ends----
                     ----The youth is now enrolled in the PCSC Waiver---
                  ---COC can begin submitting claims for this participant---




The work and programs of the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care are guided by the following Core Values: family
driven and youth guided; home and community based; strengths based and individualized; culturally and linguistically
competent; coordinated across systems and services; connected to natural helping networks; data driven and outcome
oriented; and trauma-informed. Visit https://scdhhs.gov/pcsc to learn more about the Palmetto Coordinated System of
Care.
        Initial waiver claims are not to be submitted for a date preceding the
        PCSC “Participating” status date. Per the following statement found on
        page 87 of page 192 of the CMS-approved amended waiver, “HCBS
        eligibility begins on the earliest date that all three of the following are in
        place: the participant is found to meet the targeting, risk factors and level
        of care (LOC); the participant has a provisional plan of care (crisis plan) or
        final person-centered plan; and a financial eligibility determination is
        effective. The provisional plan of care (crisis plan) may be in effect for no
        more than 60 days. Participants who have agreed to community-based
        services under the waiver and meet all LOC and financial eligibility
        requirements are placed in a waiver slot, when there is one available. COC
        informs the family of their eligibility status for the waiver.”

        SPECIAL NOTE:
        SCDHHS may require additional COC action before a youth is assigned the
        PCSC RSP in MMIS. For example, SCDHHS accesses the client record of
        Youth ABC from the “No RSP/Participating” screen in Phoenix. Upon review
        it is discovered a provisional plan of care has been uploaded for Youth DEF.
        SCDHHS will email a request for the correct provisional plan of care to be
        uploaded before the RSP will be added to the record in MMIS.
                                           ----END----




The work and programs of the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care are guided by the following Core Values: family
driven and youth guided; home and community based; strengths based and individualized; culturally and linguistically
competent; coordinated across systems and services; connected to natural helping networks; data driven and outcome
oriented; and trauma-informed. Visit https://scdhhs.gov/pcsc to learn more about the Palmetto Coordinated System of
Care.
