                                   Palmetto Coordinated System of Care Waiver
                                        Corrective Action Plan Guidance
“In accordance with 42 CFR §431.10, the Medicaid agency is responsible for ensuring that a waiver is operated
in accordance with applicable federal regulations and the provisions of the waiver itself.”

“The requirement that the Medicaid agency maintain its authority over the waiver means that any rules,
regulations and policies that govern how the waiver is operated must be issued by the Medicaid agency rather
than by the operating agency. In issuing rules, regulations and policies that affect the waiver, the Medicaid
agency may incorporate by reference rules, regulations and policies that have been adopted by the operating
agency (or another state agency – e.g., rules and regulations concerning provider qualifications). In short, the
operating agency may not independently promulgate rules, regulations and policies that have a material effect
on the provision of waiver services and how waiver processes are conducted. Policies and other types of
guidance concerning waiver operations may be issued jointly by the Medicaid agency and the operating agency.
Alternatively, the Medicaid agency may formally approve policies and guidance developed and issued by the
operating agency.”

                                                                                Instructions, Technical Guide and Review Criteria
                                                                                                                   January 2019
                                                                                                                    Pg. 52 of 337
                              ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Per the CMS-approved waiver, SCDHHS as the waiver administrator communicates identified issues to the
responsible party.

“When issues are discovered by SCDHHS through formal quality review processes the responsible party is
notified by SCDHHS staff. SCDHHS staff identifies the problem, makes the responsible party aware of the
problem and ensures that they have appropriate information to correct the problem. SCDHHS staff formally
issue a statement of deficiency requiring a corrective action plan (CAP). If SCDHHS deems the
problem/issue/concern to cause imminent danger to the waiver operations or youth, SCDHHS notifies the
responsible party and they are restricted from conducting waiver related supports and services until the issue
is resolved and SCDHHS accepts the CAP. The CAP response must be submitted within 30 days of the receipt of
the CAP by the responsibility party. The corrective action plan both addresses immediate problems and
identifies how the problems can be avoided in the future. Documentation is submitted to SCDHHS to support
corrective actions as proof that the issue has been addressed. SCDHHS reviews corrective action plans to ensure
that they address the underlying issues/concerns. SCDHHS reviews past quality review findings at future reviews
to ensure that the issues have not continued. Failure to submit and implement a corrective action plan may
result in the provider being excluded from the waiver.”
                                                                        CMS-approved waiver SC.1686.R00.02
                                                           Methods for Remediation/Fixing Individual Problems
                                                                                                  Pg. 48 of 192
The work and programs of the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care are guided by the following Core Values: family driven and youth
guided; home and community based; strengths based and individualized; culturally and linguistically competent; coordinated across systems
and services; connected to natural helping networks; data driven and outcome oriented; and trauma-informed. Visit
https://scdhhs.gov/pcsc to learn more about the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care.
                                   Palmetto Coordinated System of Care Waiver
                                        Corrective Action Plan Procedures
SCDHHS conducts random quality assurance Palmetto Coordinated System of Care waiver participant record
reviews in preparation for the annual 100% performance measure reviews required to meet waiver standards
outlined by CMS. The review process promotes compliance with state policies/procedures, federal regulations,
and federal assurances. Training materials and corrective action plans may be developed, and other measures
may be taken to support providers in attaining service standards outlined in the waiver application, policy
manual or other binding agreements.

At the completion of each review cycle, the waiver provider will receive a report of findings. This report will
provide the results of the review, recommended corrective actions, and other measures to address identified
deficiencies. Providers are required to acknowledge receipt of the findings and communicate disputes within
ten (10) calendar days of receipt. When deficiencies are identified in the quality assurance compliance review
(QACR), a corrective action plan (CAP) must be submitted to SCDHHS within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt.
SCDHHS will provide feedback on CAPs within 10 calendar days. Lastly, some deficiencies may result in time-
limited sanctions, recoupment, or other recommended actions. When a time-limited sanction is imposed, your
agency will undergo a second QACR to ensure correction of the deficiency. As with the initial QACR, disputes
from your agency must be received within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of an associated QACR.

                           • PCSC releases QACR Findings
            Day 1          • Provider recieves QACR Findings

                  • Provider acknowledges receipt and communicates
            Day 10 any dispute of findings within 10 days

                  • When applicable, Provider submits Corrective
            Day 30 Action Plan to SCDHHS

                  • SCDHHS responds to CAP submitted by the
            Day 40 Provider



The work and programs of the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care are guided by the following Core Values: family driven and youth
guided; home and community based; strengths based and individualized; culturally and linguistically competent; coordinated across systems
and services; connected to natural helping networks; data driven and outcome oriented; and trauma-informed. Visit
https://scdhhs.gov/pcsc to learn more about the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care.
