               Healthy Connections Medicaid Application Instructions
                      Palmetto Coordinated System of Care (PCSC) Waiver
Dear Parent/Guardian:

These instructions will provide you with information about the Healthy Connections Medicaid application process.
How to Apply
If your child is not currently on Medicaid, you will be asked to complete a Healthy Connections Medicaid
application.

Application for Family
If you would like to apply for Medicaid for your entire family, you will be asked to complete the following
application form:
    • SCDHHS Form 3400 Healthy Connections Medicaid Application
             o Be sure to check the box for “Applying for PCSC Waiver” in Step 1 of the application.
             o Provide information requested for everyone in your household.

Application for Child Who Needs PCSC Waiver Services Only
If you are only applying for Medicaid for the child requesting PCSC Waiver services, you will be asked to complete
the following application form:
     • SCDHHS Form 3405 Healthy Connections Medicaid Application for Single Person Household
             o Be sure to check the box for “Applying for PCSC Waiver” in Step 1 of the application.
             o Only provide information for the child who needs PCSC Waiver services.
             o Add a “Phoenix ID Number” that Continuum of Care will give you to page 3 of the application,
                 next to “Applying for PCSC Waiver”.

Where to Send the Application
When you have completed the forms, send them to the South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services
(SCDHHS):
    By mail: SCDHHS, P.O. Box 100101, Columbia, SC 29202; OR
    By fax:   803-255-8236; OR
    By email: SpecialtyUnit@scdhhs.gov

After We Receive Your Application
We will do everything we can to keep the Medicaid application process as simple as possible.
• If additional information is needed to process your application, an eligibility specialist from SCDHHS will
    contact you by phone or mail.
    • You will have 15 calendar days to provide the needed information. If you have questions once you receive
        a checklist or need more time to submit the requested information, please contact SCDHHS by calling 803-
        741-1165.
• You will receive written notice by mail of approval or denial of your application.
• Some Medicaid categories ask you to choose a managed care organization (MCO). If your child is approved in
    one of these categories, you will receive all of the needed information by mail to enroll with an MCO.
• All documents you receive will include contact information to help you get answers to any other questions.



         PCSC Waiver Application Instructions                                                         Page 1 of 1
