  Roles and Responsibilities                                  Individual Directed
Participant/Family Responsibilities of Self-
Direction
                                                              Goods and Services:
A PCSC participant/family wishing to exercise the self-       Information for Waiver Participants and Families
direction option notifies the Wraparound Facilitator (WF).
The WF ensures the participant/family demonstrates the
ability to:
    • Follow all policies and procedures for self-direction
    • Abide by Medicaid fraud and misuse rules
    • Make individual budget decisions
    • Communicate requests to WF and Medicaid staff
    • Work with the WF to monitor balances

WF Responsibilities of Self-Direction
The WF must:
   • Explain the benefits,
      risks, and
      responsibilities of self-
      direction
   • Ensure the
      participant/family can
      perform the activities
      required to manage IDGS
   • Maintain communication with the
      participant/family regarding the service
   • Inform the participant/family how to access and
                                                                  PALMETTO COORDINATED
      request IDGS
   • Monitor participant use of approved IDGS
                                                                     SYSTEM OF CARE
Questions? Contact the waiver team in your county.
http://coc.sc.gov/
         What are Individual                                           What is Self-Direction?
         Directed Goods and                                    Self-direction is a service delivery option only available to PCSC
              Services?                                        participants receiving the IDGS waiver service. This option gives
                                                               the participant/family the opportunity to decide how needs
The Palmetto Coordinated System of Care (PCSC) waiver is       will be met. Wraparound Facilitators (WF) explain the benefits
a special program for South Carolina residents aged 21 or      and responsibilities of self-direction. The participant/family can
younger with significant behavioral health needs. One of       exercise this option during the initial service plan development
the services offered by the program is Individual Directed     or as the need arises during waiver enrollment.
Goods and Services (IDGS). Below is information on IDGS,
its eligibility requirements, and what IDGS can provide to a
participant.
Definition
IDGS are goods, equipment or supplies that are not
otherwise provided through the PCSC waiver or through
the Medicaid State Plan.

Who is Eligible to Receive IDGS?
To be eligible to receive IDGS, a
participant must first be found
eligible for the PCSC waiver. If
selected, the participant/family
must agree to follow all policies                              Benefits of Self-Direction
and communicate with waiver staff.                             Choosing the self-direction service delivery option allows the
All requests for IDGS must:                                    PCSC waiver participant/family to:
     • Meet an identified need on the service plan                • Make budget decisions
     • Decrease the need for other Medicaid services              • Participate in overall decision making
     • Support inclusion in the community                         • Exercise choice and control of purchases
     • Increase participant safety in the home                    • Select goods and equipment based on choice
        environment                                               • Choose vendors based on preference, when available
     • Not be available through another source
