            PCSC Waiver Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)/ Clarifications
                                                  Individual Directed Goods and Services (IDGS)
                                                                                                    1/31/2021


    1. Are “services” approvable under the IDGS waiver benefit?
          o No, “services” are not approvable under the PCSC IDGS benefit.
          o By definition, Individual Directed Goods and Services (IDGS) are services,
              equipment or supplies not otherwise provided through this waiver or through
              the Medicaid State Plan that address an identified need in the person-centered
              plan in service of improving and maintaining the participant opportunities for full
              membership in the community. However, per the approved PCSC waiver,
              “services” have been excluded from the allowable categories in the definition
              above. PCSC IDGS funds cannot be used to pay for services. The word “services”
              has been removed from the definition in the IDGS brochure.
          o Additionally, IDGS requests must meet the following requirements: 1) the item
              decreases the need for other Medicaid services; 2) AND/OR promotes inclusion
              in the community; 3) AND/OR increases the participant’s safety in the home
              environment; 4) AND funds to purchase the item are not available through
              another source.
          o Lastly, there is a $2,000 maximum lifetime limit per participant and all requests
              will be evaluated independently.

    2. If a youth is receiving personal hygiene instruction per the person-centered plan of
       care, can the hygiene supplies be purchased under the IDGS benefit?
            o No. Hygiene supplies are considered a recurring item, one that is required on a
               regular basis. It is expected that absent the IDGS benefit, the participant will be
               able to purchase recurring items such as hygiene products from another source.



The work and programs of the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care are guided by the following Core Values: family
driven and youth guided; home and community based; strengths based and individualized; culturally and linguistically
competent; coordinated across systems and services; connected to natural helping networks; data driven and outcome
oriented; and trauma-informed. Visit https://scdhhs.gov/pcsc to learn more about the Palmetto Coordinated System of
Care.
    3. If a participant is receiving art therapy, is the participant able to use the IDGS waiver benefit
       to purchase supplies for use during therapy?
            o Yes. Typically, the therapist will provide the resources required. However, if the
                therapist does not provide the supplies, the IDGS benefit can be used to purchase
                supplies to participate in therapy. Keep in mind, funds may not be used for costs
                associated with experimental or prohibited treatments.

    4. A participant contributed to property damage to an interior door in the home. The
       parent/legal guardian deems this a safety hazard in the home. Are we able to use the IDGS
       benefit to purchase a new door, a new lock, or pay for general repairs as a means to increase
       the participant’s safety in the home?
           o No. The IDGS benefit cannot be used for the purchase or repair of items in the home-
               like setting or the infrastructure of the home-like setting.


                                General Allowable IDGS Categories/Requests

It is difficult to establish an exhaustive list of allowable items available to PCSC participants under the
IDGS benefit. Below are a few categories with associated examples.

Education/School Setting – All requested items must be clearly linked to an assessed participant need
established on the person-centered plan of care. All requests must meet the identified IDGS criteria.

             o   One-time purchase of educational supplies, apparel required for academic success

Household/Personal – All requested items must be clearly linked to an assessed participant need
established on the person-centered plan of care. All requests must meet the identified IDGS criteria.

             o   Items such as bedding and required linen to support the reintegration of the participant
                 in the home-like setting
             o   Clothing required for the reintegration of the participant in the home-like setting

Health/Medical - All requested items must be clearly linked to an assessed participant need established
on the person-centered plan of care. All requests must meet the identified IDGS criteria. One reason a
request in this category may be denied is if the item is available in the Medicaid State Plan.




The work and programs of the Palmetto Coordinated System of Care are guided by the following Core Values: family
driven and youth guided; home and community based; strengths based and individualized; culturally and linguistically
competent; coordinated across systems and services; connected to natural helping networks; data driven and outcome
oriented; and trauma-informed. Visit https://scdhhs.gov/pcsc to learn more about the Palmetto Coordinated System of
Care.
