                                  Questions	  to	  Assist	  with	  Impairment	  Assessment	  

       1. Do	  you	  have	  any	  problems	  taking	  a	  bath	  or	  shower?	  	  	  
           How	  do	  you	  take	  a	  bath?	  	  	  
                  If	  answer	  is	  tub	  or	  shower,	  ask	  the	  following	  questions:	  
                  Do	  you	  need	  help	  getting	  in	  and	  out?	  	  Are	  you	  able	  to	  get	  your	  clothes,	  towels,	  
                  soap	  yourself?	  	  Are	  you	  able	  to	  start	  your	  water?	  	  Do	  you	  have	  problems	  with	  
                  balance	  or	  do	  you	  fall?	  	  What	  parts	  of	  your	  body	  are	  you	  able	  to	  bathe	  yourself?	  	  
                  If	  answer	  is	  sponge	  bath,	  ask	  the	  following	  questions:	  	  Are	  you	  able	  to	  get	  your	  
                  water	  and	  supplies?	  	  What	  parts	  of	  your	  body	  are	  you	  able	  to	  bathe	  yourself?	  
                  Does	  bathroom	  environment	  need	  modifications	  that	  impact	  delivery	  of	  care?	  	  
                  Other	  things	  to	  consider:	  condition	  of	  bathroom,	  need	  for	  shower	  bench,	  
                  handles	  for	  safe	  transfer,	  slip	  proof	  rugs	  
       2. Can	  you	  dress	  yourself?	  
       3. Can	  you	  shave	  yourself,	  and	  brush	  your	  teeth?	  
       4. Can	  you	  shampoo	  your	  hair,	  comb	  your	  hair	  and	  apply	  lotion?	  
       5. Can	  you	  open	  jars,	  cans,	  bottles?	  	  Can	  you	  fix	  your	  meals?	  
       6. Can	  you	  feed	  yourself?	  
       7. Do	  you	  have	  any	  problems	  getting	  to	  the	  bathroom	  and	  using	  the	  toilet?	  	  Do	  you	  
           have	  trouble	  cleaning	  yourself	  after	  using	  the	  toilet?	  
       8. Can	  you	  get	  in	  and	  out	  of	  you	  bed	  or	  chair?	  
       9. Do	  you	  have	  any	  problems	  keeping	  your	  balance?	  	  Is	  participant	  at	  risk	  for	  falls?	  Are	  
           you	  able	  to	  walk	  without	  help?	  
       10. Do	  you	  do	  any	  strengthening	  exercises	  or	  range	  of	  motion	  exercises?	  
       11. Can	  you	  clean	  your	  house	  (sweep,	  dust,	  and	  mop,	  vacuum)?	  Can	  you	  change	  your	  bed	  
           linens	  or	  make	  your	  bed.	  	  
       12. Can	  you	  do	  your	  own	  laundry?	  Do	  you	  have	  a	  washer	  and	  dryer?	  	  Is	  there	  a	  
           Laundromat	  or	  laundry	  facilities	  close	  to	  where	  you	  live?	  
       13. Does	  anyone	  go	  with	  you	  to	  your	  appointments	  
       14. Can	  you	  do	  your	  own	  shopping?	  

	                                          	  
Other	  things	  to	  consider	  that	  don’t	  correspond	  to	  a	  numbered	  item	  in	  the	  Assessment:	  

         1. Can	  you	  take	  your	  own	  medicine?	  
         2. Can	  you	  use	  the	  telephone?	  
         3. Is	  COPD	  a	  diagnosis?	  	  Does	  participant	  get	  short	  of	  breath	  so	  that	  rest	  periods	  have	  to	  
            be	  built	  into	  ADLS?	  
         4. Is	  Chronic	  Pain	  a	  diagnosis?	  	  Do	  painful	  movements	  prolong	  ADLS?	  
         5. If	  Dementia	  is	  a	  diagnosis,	  does	  dementia	  impact	  ADLS?	  	  Does	  participant	  become	  
            aggressive	  or	  refuse	  care?	  Is	  participant’s	  memory	  impaired	  so	  that	  participant	  falsely	  
            remembers	  ADLS	  being	  completed?	  	  Does	  the	  participant	  appear	  to	  have	  short-­‐term	  
            memory	  impairment?	  	  Does	  the	  participant	  have	  the	  ability	  to	  make	  decisions	  
            independently?	  
         6. Is	  Depression	  a	  diagnosis	  or	  during	  the	  last	  month,	  has	  the	  participant	  often	  been	  
            bothered	  by	  little	  interest	  or	  pleasure	  in	  doing	  things?	  	  Has	  the	  participant	  felt	  down,	  
            depressed	  or	  hopeless?	  
            If	  the	  answer	  to	  either	  question	  above	  is	  yes,	  ask	  the	  following:	  
                    In	  the	  last	  two	  weeks,	  most	  of	  the	  day,	  nearly	  every	  day:	  
                                  i. has	  the	  participant	  had	  problems	  sleeping?	  
                                 ii. has	  the	  participant	  lost	  the	  ability	  to	  enjoy	  things	  that	  once	  were	  fun?	  
                               iii. does	  the	  participant	  feel	  that	  s/he	  have	  little	  value	  as	  a	  person?	  
                               iv. has	  the	  participant	  had	  a	  significant	  change	  in	  your	  appetite?	  
                                 v. how	  many	  days	  has	  the	  participant	  had	  trouble	  concentrating	  or	  
                                       making	  decisions?	  
                                 	  
          	  

	  
