         Reporting Abuse in SC                                     Abuse, Neglect and
Abuse by a Parent or Guardian
Report to either county department of social services (DSS) or     Exploitation:
local law enforcement in the county the child resides.             What is it and how do you report it?
→South Carolina Department of Social Services:
https://dss.sc.gov/abuseneglect/report-abuse-and-neglect/
→Abuse/Neglect number listed by county at:
https://dss.sc.gov/contact/

Abuse by a Non-Parent
Report to local law enforcement.

Abuse by Childcare Facility
In this instance, a parent or guardian
should call the Out of Home Abuse and
Neglect Intake Hotline at DSS:
Between 8:30am -5:00pm: 1-803-898-7669
After Hours: 1-800-645-9789

SC Department of Children’s Advocacy (DCA)
Submit complaints regarding services being provided to a child
by a state agency at:
https://childadvocate.sc.gov/submit-complaint
                                                                   PALMETTO COORDINATED
National Child Abuse Hotline
1-800-4-A-CHILD (1-800-422-4453)                                   SYSTEM OF CARE
This confidential service is available 24/7, using professional
crisis counselors that are able to provide an array of services.
                What is Abuse?                                                   What is Neglect?
Physical
Occurs when a child suffers physical injuries that are not the    Occurs when a child’s basic needs are not met and their health
result of an accident. Physical abuse does not always result in   and development is affected. Basic needs include:
injuries or marks that are visible.                                  • Food
                                                                     • Safe and clean
Sexual                                                                   environment
Occurs when an adult or stronger/older child takes advantage
                                                                     • Timely medical
of a child in a sexual way, including:
                                                                         care
    • Touching a child’s genitals (under or above clothing)
                                                                     • Clean clothing
    • Showing pornographic or inappropriate pictures to a
                                                                         and clothing
        child, or sending sexual text or emails to a child
                                                                         that protects
    • Asking a child for sexual contact or using sexually                from the
        suggestive language with a child on the internet                 weather
                                                                     • Personal
Emotional                                                                hygiene (cleanliness)
Occurs when a child is verbally or mentally abused. This may
include:
    • Teasing or bullying                                                   What is Exploitation?
    • Exposure of a child to domestic or family violence

                                                                  The illegal or improper use of a child, or the resources of a
                                                                  child for personal gain, financial profit or sexual gratification.
                                                                  Some examples include:
                                                                      • Taking or using a child’s property without authorization
                                                                          (child support, social security checks)
                                                                      • Forcing a child to sell or distribute illegal drugs
             Possible Signs of:                                       How to Protect Your Child:
                                                                  Teach your child:
Abuse (General)
                                                                     •   Say “no” when someone asks to do something that
  •   Fear or mistrust of adults
                                                                         makes them uncomfortable
  •   Frequent bedwetting or soiling of underpants
                                                                     •   Always tell a parent or trusted adult when someone
  •   Eating disorders or sudden weight changes
                                                                         hurts or scares them or makes them feel bad
  •   Sleep problems or nightmares
  •   Unexplained injuries or explanations that are
                                                                  Talk to your child:
      vague/unbelievable
                                                                     •   Explain a good touch (hug, pat on the back) as opposed
  •   Drawing violent pictures or writing violent stories
                                                                         to a bad touch (touching private areas)
                                                                     •   Explain that no one is
Abuse (Sexual)                                                           allowed to touch them in
  •   Torn or stained undergarments                                      areas that would be covered
  •   Presence of a sexually transmitted disease                         by a bathing suit
  •   Exhibiting sexual behaviors not usual for a child’s stage          ➔ Exceptions include a
      of development                                                         parent bathing a child,
                                                                             helping a child use the
Neglect                                                                      restroom or an
                                                                             examination by a doctor
  •   Malnutrition,
                                                                             or nurse at a healthcare
      begging, stealing
                                                                             facility with a parents’
      or hoarding food
                                                                             permission
  •   Poor hygiene,
                                                                     •   Explain they can tell anyone
      matted hair, dirty
                                                                         “no” if touched in private areas
      skin and body
      odor                                                           •   Explain that if anyone touches them in private areas,
                                                                         they should tell a trusted adult immediately
  •   Untreated medical problems
