                 Health Insurance Premium Payment


Questions and Answers about HIPP (Health Insurance Premium Payment)?
The HIPP Program was created to assist families of Medicaid beneficiaries with the cost of health insurance
that covers the client. The goal of the program is to help beneficiaries maintain their private insurance to
ensure Medicaid as the payer of last resort. Private plans pay first for medical services and Medicaid is
secondary. This savings benefits all South Carolinians.

In order to be approved, HIPP program cost effectiveness guidelines must be met. Once approved, a cost
effectiveness re-evaluation is done every six-month to determine continued program eligibility.

Q        Who qualifies for HIPP?

A       Applicants must be receiving South Carolina Medicaid benefits and have access to medical health
        insurance coverage. Premiums must be cost-effective. Cost effective means that the anticipated
        medical cost of the client are greater than the cost of the private health insurance premium,
        deductible, and administrative cost. Medicaid beneficiaries with a chronic medical condition
        requiring long term or short term treatment that will result in high medical cost usually qualify for
        the program. The beneficiary must be enrolled in Fee-For-Service Medicaid. Beneficiaries
        currently enrolled in a Medicaid Managed Care Organization (MCO) or Medical Home Network
        (MHN) are not eligible to participate in the HIPP program until the MCO or MHN is terminated.
        HIPP staff can assist with the dis-enrollment process.

Q        How to apply?

A       A referral form should be completed and returned indicating client’s diagnosis and other requested
        information. Providers, other state agencies and departments, self or family members and support
        groups or organizations can make referrals. Referral forms can also be obtained by calling (803)
        933-1800 Case approval or denial is usually completed within 30 days.

Q        Who receives premium payments?

A       Checks are mailed to beneficiaries, employers or insurance company. HIPP staff will determine
        the proper payee. Health insurance premiums are not paid retroactive. Example: If a case is
        approved in July premium payments will begin that month, payments are not made for prior
        months.

Q       What are the beneficiary’s responsibilities?

            Furnish HIPP staff with copies of EOB’s (Explanation of Benefits) or paid claims to support
             medical condition, medical and prescription drug expenses, and documentation of on going
             treatments, to determine cost effectiveness.
            Notify staff of any changes with insurance policy or premium amount.
            Give providers both Medicaid and health insurance benefit cards at time of service.
            Send copies of proof of premium payment each month. Proof of payment could include pay
             stubs, bank drafts, or letters from Human Resource department.

Q       What are the benefits of the HIPP program?

A       All South Carolinians will experience benefits from the program. It saves taxpayers dollars by
        making Medicaid the payer of last resort. It could assist with reducing the state’s overall
        uninsured rate. Medicaid beneficiaries are able to maintain their private health insurance, which
        may increase their accessibility to medical care. Insurance companies reimbursement rates may be
        higher than the Medicaid allowed amount; therefore, by billing the third party carrier first,
        providers will receive maximum amount of payment for services rendered.
Health Insurance Premium Payment
