                                                                                                                        1


                            Program for All Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) Guide

       PACE (Program of All-inclusive Care for the Elderly) is a Medicare and Medicaid program that helps people
       meet their health care needs in the community instead of going to a nursing home or other care facility.
       Participants have a team of health care professionals who work with participants and their families to
       coordinate care the participant’s care.


       How does PACE work?

       PACE organizations provide care and services in the home, the community, and the PACE center. They have
       contracts with many specialists and other providers in the community to make sure participants receive the
       care needed. Many PACE participants get most of their care from staff employed by the PACE organization in
       the PACE center. PACE centers meet state and federal safety requirements.


       Who can participate in PACE?

       You can have either Medicare or Medicaid, or both, to join PACE. To qualify for PACE, you must:
   •    Be 55 or older
   •    Live in the service area of a PACE organization
   •    Need a nursing home-level of care (as certified by SCDHHS)
   •    Be able to live safely in the community with help from PACE


       Participants may leave a PACE program at any time.


       What does PACE cover?

       PACE provides all the care and services covered by Medicare and Medicaid if authorized by the health care
       team. If the health care team decides a participant needs care and services that Medicare and Medicaid doesn't
       cover, PACE may still cover them.

       Services PACE covers, if approved:

   •    Adult day primary care (including doctor, recreational therapy and nursing services)
   •    Dentistry
   •    Emergency services
   •    Home care
   •    Hospital care
   •    Laboratory/x-ray services
   •    Meals
   •    Medical specialty services
   •    Nursing home care
   •    Nutritional counseling


July 2019
                                                                                                                        2


   •     Occupational therapy
   •     Physical therapy
   •     Prescription drugs
 Note
         PACE participants receive Part D-covered drugs and all other necessary medication from the PACE program.
         They do not need to join a separate Medicare Prescription Drug Plan.
   •     Preventive care
   •     Social services, including caregiver training, support groups, and respite care
   •     Social work counseling
   •     Transportation to the PACE center for activities or medical appointments, if medically necessary. You may
         also be able to get transportation to some medical appointments in the community.


        How to apply for PACE

        Applicant’s may apply for PACE by contacting the PACE site program office.


        An individual who is already Medicaid eligible for home and community based services (Category 15), is
        financially eligible for PACE as long as there is no break in service.


        Participant Payment for Services

        If a participant has Medicaid, they do not pay a monthly premium for the long-term care portion of the PACE
        benefit. If a participant doesn’t qualify for Medicaid but has Medicare, a monthly premium will be charged to
        cover the long-term care portion of the PACE benefit and a premium for Medicare Part D drugs.
        There's no deductible or co-payment for any drug, service, or care approved by the health care team.
        If a participant doesn’t have Medicare or Medicaid, he/she can pay for PACE privately.




July 2019
                                                                                                              3

       PACE Procedures:

   •    PACE designee makes referral via the Division of Long Term Living’s Centralized Intake
        https://phoenix.scdhhs.gov/cltc_referrals/new
   •    Centralized Intake checks Phoenix and MMIS for other open Phoenix Medicaid applications
   •    No open applications:
            o Centralized Intake releases case to the PACE area
            o The PACE worker retrieves case from the Unassigned Centralized Intake workflow tab
            o The PACE worker contacts the designated CLTC worker to sign off
   •    Open Phoenix Applications
            o Centralized Intake releases PACE case to the Area Office with a current active
                 application. Area Office is responsible for transferring case to PACE area.
            o CLTC Area Office PACE access worker retrieves case from the Unassigned Centralized Intake
                 workflow tab
            o CLTC Area Office PACE access worker assigns application to the designated CLTC Area Office
                 staff
            o CLTC Area Office designee reviews case/signs off and give LOC
            o CLTC designee discusses needed actions with PACE designee
            o Area Office re-assigns case to PACE designee
            o PACE coordinates waiver/program transition only for those enrolled in the waiver




            Transition to CLTC Waiver from PACE:

               A CLTC Waiver referral is received via CLTC Centralized Intake.
               The CLTC Waiver application is released to the CLTC Area
               Office.
               The CLTC Support Staff assigns the CLTC Waiver application to a CLTC Nurse
               Consultant for assessment.
               Once it has been determined the applicant is financially and medically eligible for the CLTC
               waiver, the CLTC Nurse Consultant will discuss PACE dis-enrollment/ waiver enrollment with
               the
               participant/ primary contact. This discussion must be documented in the participant’s
               Phoenix narrative.
               The assigned CLTC Nurse Consultant will contact the PACE site designee to discuss waiver/
               program transition. Enrollment in PACE will take place on the 1st of the month.
               If the participant chooses to enroll in the CLTC Waiver, the PACE program site designee
               will complete the Waiver/ PACE Enrollment online at www.scdhhs.gov. PACE dis-
               enrollment will always occur on the last day of a month.
               Once the PACE disenrollment is reflected in Phoenix, the applicant will be enrolled in the
               CLTC Waiver following normal CLTC Policy and Procedures.




July 2019
                                                                                                                4


            Transition from CLTC Waiver to PACE:

               When a CLTC Waiver participant has been determined medically and financially eligible for
               PACE, the CLTC Case Manager assigned to the CLTC Waiver application will discuss PACE
               enrollment/ waiver dis-enrollment with the participant/ primary contact and obtain a choice of
               programs. This discussion and choice must be documented in the participant’s Phoenix
               narrative.
               The assigned CLTC Case Manager will contact the PACE site designee to discuss waiver/
               program transition. Enrollment in PACE will take place on the 1st of the month.
               If the participant chooses to enroll in PACE, the PACE site designee will complete the Waiver/
               PACE Enrollment online.
               The CLTC Case Manager will ensure all hard copy documents not available in Phoenix are
               scanned to the appropriate Phoenix scan tag.
               The CLTC Case Manager will terminate all waiver service authorizations, Incontinence
               Supplies application (if applicable) and the CLTC waiver application effective the last day of
               the month and send a CLTC Notification Form to the participant/ primary contact.
               The CLTC Case Manager will send notification to the designated CLTC Support Staff to terminate
               the CLTC RSP.




July 2019
