                             Head and Spinal Cord Injured Waiver
                                   Policy and Procedures

Referral for Level of Care

   Community Long Term Care is responsible for initial (Pre-Admission Screening) nursing
   facility level of care (LOC) determinations for the Head and Spinal Cord Injured (HASCI)
   Waiver operated by The South Carolina Department of Disabilities and Special Needs
   (DDSN). A CLTC Nurse Consultant (HASCI Specialist) has been designated in each Area Office
   as the person that will facilitate level of care determinations. The HASCI Specialist is the
   liaison between the CLTC Central Office and the Area Office Staff, and will make
   recommendations, provide training and assist other office staff on policy and procedures
   regarding the HASCI Waiver

   DDSN has established intake criteria for HASCI Waiver Applicants. Once the Applicant is
   determined by DDSN to meet the target population for the HASCI Waiver and has been
   assigned a waiver slot, the Applicant will be referred to CLTC for a level of care
   determination.

   1. DDSN will make all requests for Nursing Facility level of care determinations for HASCI
      Waiver through Community Long Term Care Centralized Intake. These referrals must be
      made electronically using the following website:

       https://phoenix.scdhhs.gov/cltc_referrals/new

       Following electronic referral submission:
       • Information is entered into a secure website;
       • CLTC Centralized Intake Team will have immediate access to the referral;
       • The referral will be processed and transferred to the appropriate CLTC Area Office;
       • A referral confirmation number will be provided and may be utilized to monitor the
       status of the referral.

   2. As part of the electronic referral, DDSN Case Managers must attach the supporting
      documents listed below:

       • South Carolina Long Term Care Consent Form (SCDHHS Form 121) signed by the
       applicant or primary contact;



                                                                                               1
   • DDSN/CLTC Transmittal Form for Nursing Facility Level of Care (HASCI Form 7) with the
   top section completed;

3. CLTC will conduct a home visit, complete the assessment and render a level of care
   determination within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of the case assignment. The
   level of care must be team staffed with another CLTC Nurse Consultant.

4. If the HASCI applicant is hospitalized at the time of the level of care request, the level of
   care is tentative and must be finalized upon discharge. If the discharge is within 180
   days of the tentative level of care, a telephone update may be completed. If it appears
   the applicant does not meet level of care, then a visit must be completed prior to the
   final level of care determination. If the discharge is greater than 180 days, another visit
   must be made for the final level of care determination.

5. CLTC will forward the level of care determination to DDSN via HASCI Waiver Transmittal
   Form, completing the bottom portion of the form indicating the level of care date and
   expiration date. A copy of the completed Form 1718 and any pertinent narrative notes
   should be attached. This information must be sent to DDSN within 5 business days of
   completion.

6. This level of care determination is valid for 30 calendar days. Note: Months that have 31
   days should be monitored closely.

7. DDSN is responsible for notifying the applicant of the level of care decision.

8. CLTC will close the HASCI application in Phoenix as “entered HASCI Waiver”. If the
   applicant does not meet level of care, the case should be closed as “Medically
   Ineligible”.

9. If the Applicant has not entered HASCI within 30 days of the assessment, DDSN will
   request a level of care update via the HASCI Transmittal Form and a referral submitted
   electronically. CLTC will conduct an update via home visit or telephone assessment
   within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of the referral. The level of care must be team
   staffed with another CLTC Nurse Consultant within three (3) business days.

10. Note: The update may be completed by telephone if the request is within 180 calendar
   days of the original assessment. A face-to-face visit must be made if it appears that the
   applicant does not meet level of care, regardless of the time frame.


                                                                                               2
11. This re-determination of level of care must be team staffed with another CLTC Nurse
   Consultant. CLTC will inform DDSN of the level of care re-determination via the
   Transmittal Form.

12. If the applicant is transferring to HASCI from a CLTC Waiver, the CLTC Nurse Consultant
   may complete the assessment and level of care via a telephone assessment or face-to-
   face assessment.

   CLTC Referrals to the HASCI Waiver
   CLTC Participants may be referred to HASCI Waiver for HASCI services. Participant
   referrals to the HASCI Waiver should be made by calling the DDSN Eligibility Division at
   1-800-289-7012.

   CLTC Waiver Participants Transitioning to HASCI Waiver
   CLTC Participants may choose to terminate CLTC waiver participation in order to enroll
   in the HASCI Waiver. See section 10.21.10 for transfer to/from another waiver.




                                                                                              3
HASCI Level of Care Process

1) Individual is referred to DDSN for possible enrollment in the HASCI Waiver

2) DDSN determines if the individual meets the target population criteria

3) If the individual meets the target population criteria, they are assigned to a case
   manager who then creates a referral in Phoenix for Long Term Living (LTL) to
   perform the level of care.

4) LTL Nurse performs the level of care. An individual can meet the HASCI-Int by having
   at least 2 intermediate services.

                               Nursing Facility Level of Care

                             Number of                 Number of           Number of
                          Functional Deficits         Intermediate       Skilled Deficits
                                                         Services
         Current
      Level of Care
      Intermediate                   2
      Intermediate                   1                        1
          Skilled                    1                                           1
          Skilled                    1
                          Totally dependent in all
                                    ADLs
        Changed
      Level of Care
      Intermediate                   2
      Intermediate                   1                        1
         Skilled                     1                                           1
         Skilled                     1
                          Totally dependent in all
                                    ADLs
        HASCI-Int                                             2



                                         September 20, 2018



                                                                                            4
