Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                      Effective Date: August
1, 2015




                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS

01.10 INTRODUCTION

01.20 POLICIES

       01.21 INTAKE

       01.22 ASSESSMENT

       01.23 MEDICAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

       01.24 SERVICE PLANNING

       01.25 SERVICE AUTHORIZATION

              01.25.10   Attendants Providing Skilled Service Activities

              01.25.20   Medicaid Nursing Services

              01.25.30   In-Home Respite

              01.25.40   Specialized Medical Equipment and Supplies

              01.25.50 Two (2) Additional Prescription Drugs

              01.25.60 PERS

       01.26 TERMINATION




                                                                                     Page 1
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                      Effective Date: August
1, 2015


01.10          INTRODUCTION

               The Community Long Term Care Mechanical Ventilator Dependent Waiver
               assists persons who are dependent upon life sustaining or supporting
               mechanical ventilation at least six (6) hours per day. This program assists
               participants to remain at home as long as possible and avoid extended
               hospitalization.

               This policy contains information specific to the Ventilator Dependent waiver.
               Otherwise, policies and procedures outlined in the CLTC Community
               Choices Policy and Procedure Manual are followed.

               Ventilator Dependent cases will be assessed by CLTC Nurse Consultants.
               Case Management will be provided by enrolled Case Management Provider
               entities.




                                                                                      Page 2
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                       Effective Date: August
1, 2015


01.20          POLICIES

        01.21 Intake

               The following criteria must be met in order for a referral to be considered
               appropriate:

               1.      Applicant must be currently located in South Carolina or intend to
                       locate within the area;

               2.      Applicant must be 21 years of age or older or turning 21 within 3
                       months of the application,

               3.      Applicant must have one functional dependency; and,

               4.      Applicant must be dependent upon life sustaining mechanical
                       ventilation at least 6 hours per day.

        01.22 Assessment

               The use of phone assessment is not an option for this population. All
               assessments must be completed by face to face visit.


        01.23 Medical Eligibility Criteria

               The South Carolina Level of Care Criteria for Medicaid-sponsored Long
               Term Care Services will be used for a ventilator dependent participant. The
               participant must meet intermediate or skilled level of care and be dependent
               on life sustaining or supporting mechanical ventilation at least 6 hours per
               day.



        01.24 Service Package Approval

               The Participant’s initial service package must be approved by the Central
               Office Designee prior to service authorization. The assigned Case Manager
               will create the initial prior approval requests in Phoenix and send email
               notification to the Central Office Designee requesting review of the requests.
               The email notification should include the Participant’s CLTC number but
               should not contain any Protected Health Information.

              Subsequent prior approval requests will be reviewed and approved or denied
              by the Area Office state approvers. Any subsequent requests exceeding the
              limits which may be approved by the Area Office Approvals will be sent to
              the Central Office Designee.
                                                                                       Page 3
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                         Effective Date: August
1, 2015



       01.25 Service Authorization

               Waiver services are provided by contracted Medicaid providers to an eligible
               participant and are authorized following procedures established in the
               Community Choices waiver. The services available in this waiver include:

                      Case Management
                      Attendant Care Service
                      Personal Care I
                      Personal Care II
                      Home Delivered Meals
                      Medicaid Nursing Services
                      In-Home Respite Care
                      Institutional Respite Care
                      Environmental Modifications
                      Enhanced Environmental Modifications
                      Ramp
                      Bath Safety Equipment
                      Pest Control
                      Enhanced Pest Control
                      Specialized Medical Equipment
                      Specialized Medical Supplies
                      Personal Emergency Response System
                      Nutritional Supplements

               Mechanical Ventilator Dependent Waiver Participants are entitled to two (2)
               additional prescription drugs each month.

               NOTE: The following services are not available in this waiver: Adult Day
               Health Care, Adult Day Health Care Transportation, Respite in the
               Residential Care Facility, Companion (Agency or Individual),
               Telemonitoring, Adult Care Home and Nursing Home Transition.

               Ventilator dependent participants require care which is considered skilled.
               Skilled procedures, including but not limited to, tracheostomy care,
               suctioning, and all ventilator care techniques such as making routine
               ventilator checks, adding water to the humidifier, changing and cleaning the
               tubing are not to be performed by the Personal Care I/II. A trained individual
               must be present in the home at all times while the Personal Care I/II is present
               unless the participant is independent with all skilled care/ procedures.
               Shortness of breath, the need for suctioning or ventilator failure may occur at
               any time and can be life threatening and must be dealt with promptly. Personal
               Care I/II is not responsible for these procedures.


                                                                                        Page 4
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                        Effective Date: August
1, 2015


               This does not preclude the authorization of Attendant or Personal Care
               services. Bathing, dressing, linen changes, light housekeeping, shopping, etc.
               are still necessary procedures and can relieve the family. Nurse Consultants
               and Case Managers should counsel the family in the above cases to assure
               that they are aware of the Attendant or Personal Care duties, responsibilities,
               and limitations.

               01.25.10 Attendants Providing Skilled Service Activities

                       The waiver service definition for “Attendant” allows a participant or
                       his/her designee to self-direct "skilled service activities" performed
                       by the Attendant with approval from the participant’s physician.
                       These activities are considered "Health maintenance activities"
                       which could be performed by the participant if the individual were
                       physically and mentally capable.
                       With Physician approval, Attendants may provide skilled services
                       which are considered health maintenance activities.
                       When skilled services are being requested to be completed by the
                       Atttendant, the following procedure will be followed:
                                  For new Attendant referrals, the Case Manager will
                                   create a referral to UAP for Attendant Care including a
                                   comment indicating “Participant/ representative has
                                   requested a skilled service to be provided.”

                                  For existing referrals, already in process with UAP,
                                   where a skilled service need has been identified, the Case
                                   Manager will note in the comment section on the referral
                                   “Participant/ representative has requested a skilled
                                   service to be provided.”

                                         The Case Manager will email UAP to notify
                                          them of the request. UAP does not receive
                                          notifications through Phoenix when a referral is
                                          edited.

                                  UAP will send the “MEDICAID HOME &
                                   COMMUNITY BASED WAIVERS PHYSICIAN
                                   STATEMENT FOR PARTICIPANT DIRECTED
                                   ATTENDANT CARE” and a copy of the legislation to
                                   the assigned Case Manager by email.



                                                                                       Page 5
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                        Effective Date: August
1, 2015


                                  The Case Manager will provide the form and a copy of
                                   the legislation to the Participant or Attendant’s Employer
                                   of Record.

                                  The Participant or Employer of Record will submit the
                                   Physician’s Statement to the Participant’s physician
                                   requesting physician’s approval/ signature.

                                  Once the signed Physician’s Statement has been received,
                                   the Case Manager will scan the form into Phoenix scans
                                   under the “Attendant” scan tag.

                                  The Case Manager will email UAP to notify them the
                                   form has been returned and scanned into Phoenix.

                                  UAP will complete the Attendant match visit once this
                                   notification is received.


                       The following list of services are examples of activities which may
                       be appropriate for the Attendant to perform. This list is not all
                       inclusive.
                       Tracheostomy care
                       Ventilator Care - taking on and off the vent
                       Suctioning- tracheostomy/ oral
                       Finger stick blood glucose monitoring
                       Wound care
                       Enteral feedings (PEG or Nasogastric)
                       Bowel program
                       Catheter Care
                       Ostomy Care
                       Any other skilled service requested by the participant/Employer
                       of Record or physician requires Central Office approval.
                       NOTE: If the participant changes physicians and the physician
                       who signed the Physician Statement is no longer involved in the
                       participant’s care, a new Physician’s Statement is required. The
                       Attendant may continue to provide the approved skilled services
                       while a new Physician’s Statement is obtained.
                                                                                       Page 6
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                          Effective Date: August
1, 2015


                       If the service is directed by a designee instead of the participant and
                       the designee is no longer able to direct the skilled service activities
                       performed by the Attendant, a new physician statement is required.
                       If the designee who is directing the activities is also the Employer of
                       Record/ Representative, a new Attendant Request and match visit is
                       also required.



               01.25.20 Medicaid Nursing Services

                       Authorization of Medicaid Nursing Services authorization does not
                       require an initial evaluation visit by the provider. To authorize, the
                       Case Manager will complete the following activities:

                              contacts the participant’s physician concerning the participant
                               needs, availability of skilled nursing services, and projected
                               service schedule, including amount, frequency and anticipated
                               duration of services.

                              sends the CLTC PDN Physician Order for private duty nursing
                               to the Physician. A signed order must be obtained before
                               services may begin.

                              obtains Provider Choices from the Participant or Primary
                               Contact in writing utilizing the Service Provider Report from
                               Phoenix or verbally. When obtained verbally, the choices
                               must be documented in the narrative in the order of preference.

                              creates a referral to the provider of choice.

                              contacts the provider who accepts the referral to negotiate the
                               schedule and start date.

                              issues the Service Provision Form, DHHS Form 175.

                                      Note: The hours per week are indicated on the
                                      Service Provision Form. The service is not day
                                      specific.

                                  o The Case Manager and provider should negotiate an
                                    effective solution to any differences that may arise
                                    between the projected and the final service schedules.

                                 The provider obtains MD orders for participant’s care.


                                                                                         Page 7
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                        Effective Date: August
1, 2015


                              The provider must send a treatment plan to CLTC after the
                               first in-home nursing visit.


               01.25.30    In-Home Respite

               In-home respite is designed to provide temporary relief for a primary
               caregiver and maintain the participant at home to avoid institutionalization.
               In-home respite services may be provided for a period not to exceed fourteen
               days per state fiscal year (July 1 - June 30). In-home respite services must be
               provided by an RN or LPN. CLTC is required to obtain a Physician Order
               for the service. All other waiver services must be discontinued during the in-
               home respite period. The provider is responsible for securing skilled nursing
               orders from the physician. The provider must send a treatment plan to CLTC
               after the first in-home respite nursing visit.

               Note: The participant may receive both fourteen days of In-Home
               Respite and fourteen days of Institutional Respite in the same fiscal year.

                       The following procedure will be followed when a request is made for
                       In-Home Respite for a participant in the Mechanical Ventilator
                       Dependent Waiver.

                       •      The Case Manager discusses the in home respite request with
                       the Area Administrator or area office designee.

                       •      The Case Manager submits a prior approval request in the
                       Service Plan in Phoenix.

                       •     The Case Manager documents the request and outcome of the
                       Area Administrator discussion in the narrative.

                       •       The Area Administrator reviews the request.

                             If the Area Administrator feels the request is justified, the
                       Area Administrator

                                  enters a comment stating the approval in the justification
                                   column of the prior approval request and

                                  directs the assigned Case Manager (utilizing the prior
                                   approval comment field) to send notification to the Central
                                   Office Designee via email that the request is available for
                                   review in the prior approval section.

                       Note: The email to the Central Office designee is to include the
                       participant’s CLTC # in the message but must not include any
                                                                                        Page 8
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                         Effective Date: August
1, 2015


                       Protected Health Information.

                               If the Area Administrator feels the request is not justified or
                       the participant has already exceeded the 14 allowable respite days for
                       the year, the Area Administrator

                                  enters “0” in the review column,
                                  enters a comment in the justification field, and
                                  clicks save.

                       Note: The assigned Case Manager is notified of the denial via
                       Phoenix.

                       •      For requests sent to Central Office, the Central Office
                       designee reviews the request and completes the prior approval section
                       in Phoenix.

                       •      The assigned Case Manager provides the participant/ primary
                       contact with a Service Provider Report for In-Home Respite and
                       obtains the participant’s/ primary contact’s choice of providers in the
                       order of preference.

                       •       The assigned Case Manager creates a referral for in-home
                       respite to send to the chosen providers in the order of preference.

                       •       Once a provider has accepted the referral, the assigned Case
                       Manager creates a Service Provision Form for the approved number
                       of units. One unit equals a twenty four hour period. The unit of
                       service will be a patient day which is defined as a twenty-four (24)
                       hour period, including the day of admission to respite and excluding
                       the day of discharge.

                       •       The In-Home Respite Provider is responsible for obtaining
                       Physician Orders for nursing care to be provided during the respite
                       period.

                       •       All other in-home services, such as PCl, PCll, attendant, RN
                       and LPN, will not be provided during the respite period. The assigned
                       CLTC worker notifies all active in-home care providers, by phone call
                       or Phoenix conversation, to place these services on hold during the
                       respite period. The authorizations may remain active but in-home care
                       providers are not to provide services during the respite period.


                       NOTE: Refer to the MECHANICAL VENTILATOR DEPENDENT
                       WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES FOR IN-HOME RESPITE located
                       in Phoenix HELP for additional information.
                                                                                        Page 9
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                         Effective Date: August
1, 2015




                 01.25.40 Specialized Medical Equipment and Supplies

                 Specialized medical equipment and supplies, to include devices, controls, or
                 appliances, specified in the service plan, will enable recipients to perform
                 activities of daily living, or to perceive, control, or communicate with the
                 environment in which they live. A CLTC Physician's Order is not required
                 for this service.

                 Durable medical equipment (DME) and/or supplies may be authorized if the
                 equipment or supplies cannot be reimbursed under Medicare, Medicaid State
                 Plan, or third party insurance and the provider is a Medicaid enrolled DME
                 provider. The Case Manager must check other sources of payment prior to
                 authorizing this waiver service.

                 Provider choice must be obtained and referral process completed in Phoenix.
                 Upon acceptance of the referral, the DME provider should be contacted prior
                 to authorizing services.

                 The authorization should include the name of the item, the number of units
                 per month, price per unit, and total price per month. A service authorization
                 must be completed in Phoenix. This service must be included in the Service
                 Plan, but a copy of the plan should not be sent to the provider.

                 Note: The participant must have the problem “Participant is dependent on
                 Mechanical Ventilation” and the intervention “will authorize specialized
                 medical equipment/ supplies” included in the Service Plan in order to make a
                 referral for this service.

                 Approval requests for specialized medical supplies and/ or medical
                 equipment, not covered by the participant’s insurance (including Medicare
                 and Medicaid), are made to the Central Office Designee. If the participant has
                 no other insurance coverage, the assigned Case Manager does the following:

                   obtains a physician’s order for the requested equipment or supplies.


of preference.


medical supplies or medical equipment.

                                                            on, specific supplies/equipment
being requested and cost, in the Service Plan Prior Approval section in Phoenix and sends an
email to the Central Office Designee to review the request.

                                                                                        Page 10
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                        Effective Date: August
1, 2015


               Once the request has been reviewed, the Central Office Designee approves
or denies the request in the prior approval section and notifies the Case Manager of the
decision via email.

                The Case Manager creates a referral which is sent to the provider(s) of choice
in the order of preference.

                                         ,

               (1) Click “Waiver Support” on the Participant’s carousel
               (2) Click “New Referral”
               (3) Choose “Specialized Medical Supplies” from the drop down box
               (4) Click “Next”
               (5) Select chosen providers in order of preference by clicking the “+” sign
beside provider name.
               (6) Click “Next”
               (7) Enter referral details
               (a) Confirm units are correct.
               (b) Verify Frequency
               (c) Enter a description of the supplies and quantity in the “Notes” field
               (d) Enter Start Date
               (e) Enter End Date (if appropriate)
               (The referral does not need an end date unless the medical supplies are only
needed for a known length of time. For ongoing needs for an indefinite time period, the end
date will remain open.)
               (8) Click “create referral”
               (9) Click “start referral process”

               Note: The assigned Case Manager will monitor for appropriate service
delivery and for continued need for the supplies during participant contacts, monthly,
quarterly and upon re-evaluation.

                  For medical equipment,

              (1) Click “Waiver Supports”
              (2) Click “New Referral”
              (3) Select providers in order of preference by clicking the green + sign by the
provider’s name.
              (4) Click “next”
              (5) Enter the details for the referral
              (a) Verify # of units displayed is “1”.
              (b) Verify frequency is “authorization”
              (c) Enter a description of the equipment in the “Notes” field
              (d) Enter “start date”
              (e) Enter “end date” 30 days from the start date
              (6) Click “create referral”
              (7) Click “Start referral process”
                                                                                      Page 11
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                          Effective Date: August
1, 2015



               Once the provider accepts the referral, the assigned Case Manager will
receive a dashboard notification. The assigned Case Manager creates an authorization.

               For medical supplies,

               1) Click “Waiver Supports”
               2) Click “Active Referrals”
               3) Click on the referral
               4) Click “Approve Provider” to accept the Provider
               5) In “Notes” enter a description of the supplies and the frequency of delivery
               6) Enter the dollar amount obtained from Provider in the “Rate” box
               7) Click “Create Authorization”
               8) Click “Send to Provider”

               For medical equipment,

               1) Click “Waiver Supports”
               2) Click “Active Referrals”
               3) Click on the referral
               4) Click “Approve Provider” to accept the Provider
               5) Enter a description of the equipment in the “Notes” field
               6) Enter the dollar amount obtained from Provider in the “Rate” box
               7) Click “Create Authorization”
               8) Click “Send to Provider”

               Note: If you enter a start and end date, you will also need to enter a termination
reason in order to create the authorization. For example, the termination reason may be “One
time authorization for equipment.”


               01.25.50 Two (2) Additional Prescription Drugs

               The two (2) additional prescription drugs do not require a Service Provision
               Form. This service should be explained to the participant by the Nurse
               Consultant and Case Manager.

               For a participant entering the waiver who is a category of Medicaid other than
               MAO (Category 15), a statement should be added to the CLTC Notification
               Form explaining that the participant is eligible to receive two (2) additional
               prescription drugs through Medicaid. The participant can present this letter
               to the pharmacy for the additional prescriptions until the Medicaid system
               reflects the participant’s current benefits.




                                                                                         Page 12
Division of Community Long Term Care
Ventilator Dependent Policy and Procedure Manual                       Effective Date: August
1, 2015


                                      Sample Statement

               Effective (waiver date) the above participant was enrolled in the CLTC
               waiver and is entitled to two (2) additional prescription drugs per month
               above the current limit.

               01.25.60    PERS

               The policy utilized in the Community Choices waiver, does not apply to this
               waiver. The participant does not have to be alone 6 or more hours 3 or more
               days a week.


               01.26 Termination

               All termination codes from the Community Choices Policy and Procedure
               manual apply.

               Note: If a participant continues to meet skilled or intermediate level of care
               but is no longer ventilator dependent, the participant must be terminated from
               the ventilator dependent waiver and transferred to the Community Choices
               waiver without regard to the processing list.




                                                                                      Page 13
