Directive 17-11

Date: October 25, 2017

Subject: Clarification re: Assessment Requirements for Home Again and CLTC Waiver Transition

Action Required: Please distribute to all CLTC staff, Home Again staff and Case Management Providers

Submitted by: Susan Bolt, RN



Phoenix indicates a re-evaluation is due for Home Again Participant’s prior to the end of the 365th day of
Home Again participation. The re-evaluation is being triggered based on the date of the initial
assessment completed by the CLTC Nurse Consultant prior to enrollment in the Home Again program.

Home Again participants do not require an annual re-evaluation because a participant is only enrolled
in Home Again for 365 days. Therefore, Case Managers working with Home Again participants should
not complete the waiver re-evaluation showing in Phoenix as being due at the end of Home Again
participation year.

Participants who wish to continue to participate in a CLTC waiver following termination from Home
Again, require an initial assessment by the CLTC Nurse Consultant. The Home Again Transition
Coordinator will make an electronic referral through CLTC Centralized Intake for the appropriate CLTC
waiver and send email notification of the referral, including the Home Again End Date, to the CLTC Area
Administrator at least 3 weeks prior to termination of the Home Again Application.

The CLTC Nurse Consultant will complete the initial waiver assessment as soon as possible following
assignment to ensure waiver enrollment the day following termination from Home Again and prevent
service interruption. Normal waiver enrollment policy and procedure will be followed.

Prime participants who are participating in Home Again and wish to be assessed for continued
participation in a CLTC waiver will be assessed by a CLTC Nurse Consultant. The Level of Care will be
team staffed by two CLTC Nurse Consultants. The CLTC Nurse Consultant will transfer the waiver
application to the state case management staff for waiver enrollment. Following wavier enrollment and
transfer of the case for ongoing case management, the Prime Care Coordinator will be responsible for
reviewing service plan changes, prior approval requests and team staffing level of care at re-evaluation.
