                 Intake	  Criteria	  Not	  Met	  
Intake	  criteria	  MUST	  be	  met	  for	  an	  assessment	  to	  be	  	  completed.	  The	  three	  
parts	  of	  intake	  criteria	  are	  referral	  reasons,	  address,	  and	  age.	  Below	  are	  steps	  to	  
check	  intake	  criteria	  and	  the	  intake	  criteria	  for	  each	  program.	  
         Check	  the	  Referral	  Reasons	  
 On	  the	  carousel,	  click	  “Application”.	  
 On	  the	  next	  screen	  click	  the	  name	  of	  the	  program.	  e.g.	  
  “Community	  Choices”	  	  	  
 If	  there	  are	  no	  “Referral	  reasons”	  displaying	  on	  the	  top	  
  right,	  click	  “Edit”	  	  
        Check	  the	  Referral	  Reasons	  
Enter	  the	  referral	  reasons	  and	  click	  “Save”.	  Please	  
  note:	  There	  are	  diﬀerent	  referral	  reasons	  for	  
  diﬀerent	  programs.	  
                 Check	  the	  Address	  
 On	  the	  carousel,	  click	  “Participant	  Information”	  
 Click	  the	  “Address”	  Tab	  
 Verify	  there	  is	  an	  address	  present	  with	  “CURRENT”	  
  checked	  
                             Check	  the	  Age	  
 On	  the	  carousel,	  click	  “Participant	  Information”	  
 Click	  the	  “Demographic”	  accordion	  
 Subtract	  the	  participant’s	  date	  of	  birth	  from	  today’s	  date.	  
 The	  birth	  date	  is	  also	  on	  the	  search	  results	  screen.	  
                     Community	  Choices	  
 18	  years	  old	  or	  older	  and	  	  
 Located	  in	  the	  geographic	  area	  served	  by	  the	  regional	  
      oﬃce.	  If	  out	  of	  state	  must	  intend	  to	  locate	  within	  the	  
      geographic	  area	  and	  
 Have	  two	  of	  the	  referral	  reasons	  checked	  
 	         	  Eating              	  Toileting 	  Dressing 	  Bathing	  
 	  or	  have	  one	  of	  the	  referral	  reasons	  checked	  
 	         	  Locomotion                    	  Transfer 	  Incontinence	  
                    Ven;lator	  Waiver	  
 21	  years	  old	  or	  older	  and	  
 Located	  in	  the	  geographic	  area	  served	  by	  the	  regional	  
  oﬃce.	  If	  out	  of	  state	  must	  intend	  to	  locate	  within	  the	  
  geographic	  area	  and	  
 Dependent	  upon	  life	  sustaining	  ventilator	  at	  least	  6	  
  hours	  daily	  and	  
 Have	  two	  of	  the	  referral	  reasons	  checked	  
     	  Eating	  Toileting                    	        	  Dressing       	  Bathing	  
    or	  	  have	  one	  of	  the	  referral	  reasons	  checked	  
     	  Locomotion 	  Transfer                          	  Incontinence	  
            Pre-­‐Admission	  Screening	  
 Located	  in	  the	  geographic	  area	  served	  by	  the	  regional	  
      oﬃce.	  If	  out	  state	  must	  intend	  to	  locate	  within	  the	  
      geographic	  area	  and	  
 Have	  two	  of	  the	  referral	  reasons	  checked	  
 	      	  Eating               	  Toileting 	  Dressing 	  Bathing	  
or	  have	  one	  of	  the	  referral	  reasons	  checked	  
 	      	  Locomotion                     	  Transfer 	  Incontinence	  
                                          ADHC	  
                                        PACE	  
 55	  years	  old	  or	  older	  and	  
 Located	  in	  the	  geographic	  area	  served	  by	  the	  regional	  
      oﬃce.	  If	  out	  of	  state	  must	  intend	  to	  locate	  within	  the	  
      geographic	  area	  and	  
 Have	  two	  of	  the	  referral	  reasons	  checked	  
 	         	  Eating              	  Toileting 	  Dressing 	  Bathing	  
or	  	  have	  one	  of	  the	  referral	  reasons	  checked	  
 	         	  Locomotion                    	  Transfer 	  Incontinence	  
HASCI	  
   Referred	  from	  DDSN-­‐HASCI	  
    CLTC	  intake	  form	  included	  
         Consent	  from	  included	  
     Transmittal	  form	  included	  
                              TEFRA	  
 Referred	  from	  Medicaid	  eligibility	  
                          HIV	  Waiver	  
 Located	  in	  the	  geographic	  area	  served	  by	  the	  regional	  
  oﬃce	  and	  
 Diagnosed	  HIV	  or	  AIDS	  
Children’s	  Personal	  Care	  and/or	  Private	  
                Duty	  Nursing	  
 Age	  under	  21	  and	  
 Located	  in	  the	  geographic	  area	  served	  by	  the	  regional	  
  oﬃce.	  If	  out	  of	  state	  must	  intend	  to	  locate	  within	  the	  
  geographic	  area	  and	  
 Current	  Medicaid	  Recipient	  and	  
 Need	  personal	  care	  2	  or	  private	  duty	  nursing	  services	  
     Medically	  Complex	  Children’s	  
                   Waiver	  
 Age	  under	  18	  and	  
 Referred	  from	  MCC	  staﬀ	  
    Enrollment	  criteria	  not	  met	  
Enrollment	  criteria	  MUST	  be	  met	  for	  a	  participant	  to	  be	  	  
Enrolled	  in	  Community	  Choices,	  HIV	  Waiver,	  Ventilator	  	  
Waiver,	  Medically	  Complex	  Children	  Waiver,	  Children’s	  	  
Personal	  Care,	  or	  Children’s	  Private	  Duty	  Nursing.	  	  
                 Enrollment	  Criteria	  
• Medicaid	  Eligibility	  must	  be	  indicated	  for	  all	  programs.	  
• An	  Assessment	  must	  be	  completed	  within	  the	  last	  30	  days	  
  for	  all	  programs	  EXCEPT 	  Child	  PCA	  and	  Child	  PDN.	  These	  
  two	  programs	  must	  have	  an	  assessment,	  but	  are	  not	  time	  
  limited.	  
• Level	  of	  Care	  must	  be	  present	  for	  all	  programs.	  
    • Intermediate	  or	  Skilled	  for	  Community	  Choices,	  Ventilator	  
      Dependent,	  and	  Medically	  Complex	  Children	  
    • At	  Risk	  for	  HIV	  Waiver	  
    • Meet	  for	  Child	  PCA	  and	  Child	  PDN	  
• Age	  criteria	  must	  be	  met	  for	  all	  programs	  EXCEPT	  HIV	  
   which	  does	  not	  have	  any	  age	  restrictions.	  
    • Community	  Choices	  at	  least	  18	  
    • Ventilator	  Waiver	  at	  least	  21	  
    • Child	  PCA,	  and	  Child	  PDN	  less	  than	  21	  
    • Medically	  Complex	  Children	  less	  than	  18	  
    • HASCI	  less	  than	  65	  
         Checking	  Medicaid	  Eligibility	  
• If	  the	  participant	  is	  a	  current	  Medicaid	  recipient	  and	  a	  Medicaid	  
    number	  is	  in	  Phoenix,	  the	  information	  will	  be	  displayed	  on	  the	  CM	  or	  
    NC	  dashboard.	  If	  information	  is	  not	  displayed	  on	  the	  dashboard.	  
•   Click	  “Participant	  information”	  on	  the	  carousel	  
•   Click	  on	  the	  “Demographic	  Information”	  accordion	  
•   Check	  “Financial	  Eligibility	  Veriﬁed”	  
•   Enter	  a	  Medicaid	  number,	  if	  needed	  
                  Check	  Assessment	  
• Click	  “Assessment”	  on	  the	  carousel	  
• Check	  the	  date	  on	  the	  most	  recent	  assessment	  for	  the	  
   program	  the	  participant	  will	  be	  entering.	  If	  the	  assessment	  
   is	  more	  than	  30	  days	  before	  the	  enrollment	  date,	  a	  new	  
   assessment	  needs	  to	  be	  completed.	  
                   Check	  Assessment	  
 Check	  to	  make	  sure	  all	  the	  sections	  of	  the	  assessment	  are	  
   completed	  and	  ALL	  the	  lights	  are	  green,	  including	  the	  
   level	  of	  care	  section.	  
                          Check	  the	  Age	  
• On	  the	  carousel,	  click	  “Participant	  Information”	  
• Click	  the	  “Demographic”	  accordion	  
• Subtract	  the	  participant’s	  date	  of	  birth	  from	  today’s	  date.	  
• The	  birth	  date	  is	  also	  on	  the	  search	  results	  screen.	  
                  Check	  the	  Address	  
• On	  the	  carousel,	  click	  “Participant	  Information”	  
• Click	  the	  “Address”	  Tab	  
• Verify	  there	  is	  an	  address	  checked	  “CURRENT”	  that	  is	  in	  
   South	  Carolina	  
