Claim Resolution Training




                            1
Providers are required to use The Electronic Visit Verification
System (EVV) which includes Care Call and the Mobile
Application to generate claims for payment for services.
If provider/provider workers fail to complete a claim using
EVV a payment is not generated and forward to MMIS for
payment. A resolution then becomes necessary.
Webster Defines Resolution as “the act or process of
resolving”.
Provider Agencies create resolutions through their Phoenix
Provider Portal and submit via Phoenix for resolving.
Attendant Care/Companion Individual providers do not have access to Phoenix.
Attendant providers must submit a paper resolution log for claim resolution to their
assigned CLTC Office.
Processing Claim Resolutions
When providers submit a claim for resolution, they must state an
exception reason. The exception reason will determine DLTL
action.
Examples of Provider Exception Reason.
Examples of Case Management Provider Agency Exception Reason.
Resolution submitted by providers are located under the Phoenix Home
Page on your dashboard under the Sidebar Navigation and Claims.
Sidebar
Navigation
Claims-Review Claim Resolutions.
You can sort Claim Resolutions by Area or Program or both
depending on your Phoenix Role.
Your choice of viewing will take you to the All Claim Resolutions screen. You will see all
Resolutions submitted by providers for all programs. This view also provides the total
number of claims submitted by provider, and timeliness.
To begin processing Claim Resolutions Select Program.
Select Service Choice.
Select in Home Service Provider.
Once you have made your selection of Provider, Provider Claim Resolutions will appear.
If you are having problems sorting Claim Resolutions by Area or
Program or both it may be because of your Phoenix assigned Role.

Contact your supervisor for questions regarding your Phoenix
Access Role.
Your role may require that you run a Resolution Report in order to identify which provider
claims to process for specific CLTC Area Office.
         Resolution Report

Select Reports from your Phoenix dashboard.
                Resolutions Report




Select Claims
                     Resolutions Report




Select Resolutions
                      Resolutions Report
Choose your filters
               Resolutions Report

Select

Report Types
▪ Summary
▪ Detail
▪ List
                         Resolutions Report


You may select Report by
Service Date Range using options
below.
Range Search Options
▪ Specific Dates
▪ Current Week
▪ Previous Week
▪ Current Month
▪ Previous Month
▪ Last 7 Days
▪ Last 30 days
                        Resolutions Report

         OR
You may select Report by
Submission Date Range using options
below.
Range Search Options
▪ Specific Dates
▪ Current Week
▪ Previous Week
▪ Current Month
▪ Previous Month
▪ Last 7 Days
▪ Last 30 days
                          Resolutions Report




Select CLTC Area Office
                  Resolutions Report

Once you have entered filter options select run report.
                        Resolutions Report

           Select which option you like to view report.




Password is required to open reports.
               Resolutions Report

The password is your Phoenix user ID in all lowercases.
              Resolution Report

Look for Provider claims that requires CLTC Action.
Once you have identified the provider for the CLTC Area . Go to
Phoenix Claims and search for provider claims to process.
DLTL staff will review claim resolutions to determine what action
should be taken before processing claim.

▪ Accept
▪ Accept with a strike
▪ Delete
▪ Deny claim



(do not delete claims unless it was entered by DLTL staff in error)
Action
DLTL staff may deny a claim resolution for reasons listed below.


➢ Duplicate Claim.

➢ Services not provided.

➢ Worker at strike (12) limit.
If a claim is denied, DLTL staff must select a reason for denial.
When processing claims and assigning strikes refer to the

                   Twelve Strike Policy
Personal Care I and II, Children’s Personal Care, Attendant,
            Companion and Nursing Services
                Located in Phoenix Help
Workers who are new to the Electronic Visit Verification system (EVVS)
will have a one-month grace period to learn the system before strikes
begin to be issued. Accept claims during this period.




   Phoenix will alert you that worker is in Grace Period.
One strike will be given to a worker for each incident where a
resolution must be done and no valid reason is given.
For example, if worker is providing Personal Care I & II services for a
participant and checks in for both services but fails to check out, only one
strike will be given to correct both the PCI & PCII claims.
Phoenix will automatically calculate the number of strikes for each strike
assignment.
After the twelfth strike, resolutions will no longer be accepted if no valid
and verified reason is given. DLTL staff will deny claim resolution.
Claim Resolutions that was denied will not submit for payment. Provider
will receive notification of denial via Phoenix.
Each resolution not submitted timely will receive a strike. Providers must submit
the resolution within 10 days from the Sunday following the Date of Service to be
timely. Any resolutions submitted after that date will have strikes issued.
                             Phoenix will indicate that resolution was not timely.
Once you have enter your action, select Submit Resolutions.
Claim Resolutions that was accepted or accepted with strike
is submitted for payment.
You do not have to wait until you process all of the provider
claim resolutions before you Submit Resolutions.

Example: DLTL staff need additional information from Case
Manager before CLTC action can be determine.
Once Claim Resolutions is Submitted. Next you will see a review of the
resolutions you submitted for payment. You can print this screen for
your records.
Providers should report any problems using the participant’s landline
phone or the mobile app immediately (by the next business day) to
case manager or Area Office. Provider may use narrative
conversation to report phone problems.
   Strike assigned to a worker in error can be deleted.


Go to worker’s provider agency dashboard and select Workers.
Select Worker- Locate the date strike was assigned in error.




               Select delete to remove strike.
                              Action Accept -See Examples below.
Exception Reason- Client’s Phone Not Functioning
Personal Care Aide checked in using Care Call; however when PCA got ready to check out the
participant landline phone was disconnected. PCA notified her supervisor. Provider agency notified CM
using conversation in Phoenix by the next business day. Accept Resolution.

Exception Reason- Worker Error
PCA forgot to check out. Provider agency send in a resolution. PCA has only been hired for 20 days.
PCA is in Grace Period. Accept Resolution.


Exception Reason- Mobile App/Care Call Not Functioning.
Provider sends in resolution- Care Call or mobile app not working and central office has said not to issue
strikes. Accept Resolution.
              Action Accept With A Strike -See Examples below.

Exception Worker Error
PCA checked in and forgot to check out. Provider sends resolution. Worker is no
longer in grace period. Accept with a Strike.


Exception Client’s Phone Not Available.
Participant phone was not available on July 3, 2019. Provider agency submitted
Resolution on August 13 2019. Resolution submitted late according to policy.
Accept with a strike.
                Action Denied -See Examples below.

Exception Worker Error.
PCA checked in and forgot to check out. Provider sends resolution. PCA has 12
strikes. Resolution is denied.

Exception Worker Error.
No Check in or out. PCII made visits during unauthorized day. Resolution is
denied.

Provider submit duplicate resolution for the same date and times. Resolution is
denied.
Processing Attendant Resolution Claims
Attendant must submit a resolution to CLTC Area Office for
resolving.

Resolution Log must be signed by attendant and Employer
of Record (EOR).
Processing Attendant Resolution
When Processing Attendant Resolution, please refer
           to the Twelve Strike Policy
If Attendant fail to check in or out, a claim must be added. To
  add a claim, select Claims from your Phoenix Home Page.



Add A Claim.
Enter information under the Add Claims section as it appears
on Resolution Log. Worker ID, CLTC Number, Date of Service
                         and Service.
Select Apply Defaults-Information will then show under
the add claim section.
Enter the Check In/Out information from resolution log.
Select Save from the action box. Please remember to select
save or your entry will not submit for payment.
If Attendant have more than one claim for same participant.
Select add claim- You can add additional claims. You will
need to change Date of Service.
Select Submit after you have entered claims. Claims will
then submit for payment.
 If Attendant created a claim using mobile app or care call but
                    forgot to check in or out.



Select
Edit/Delete/View/
Search Claims
Search for Claim using options below.
Locate Claim and update Information.
Select Save- Action
Submit Resolutions
74
