FEDERAL REGULATIONS




                      1
Federal Regulations Guiding Health and
Welfare
• Section 1915 (c) of the Social Security Act, mandates that waivers
  provide assurances to CMS that the state has necessary safeguards to
  protect the health and welfare of participants receiving services.
   • All waivers administered and operated by the Division of Long Term Living fall
     under this waiver authority.
   • Information related to the health and welfare of waiver participants are
     reported annually to CMS.


• 42 CFR § 441.302 (a) defines other necessary safeguards that protect
  the health and welfare of an individual.

                                                                                      2
FEDERAL REGULATIONS




                      3
       Federal Regulations Guiding Health and Welfare

• Section 1915 (c) of the Social Security Act, mandates that waivers
  provide assurances to CMS that the state has necessary safeguards to
  protect the health and welfare of participants receiving services.
   • All waivers administered and operated by the Division of Long Term Living fall
     under this waiver authority.
   • Information related to the health and welfare of waiver participants are
     reported annually to CMS.


• 42 CFR § 441.302 (a) defines other necessary safeguards that protect
  the health and welfare of an individual.



                                                                                      4
                                 Revised Waiver Guidance

• An Informational Bulletin was released on March 12, 2014 entitled
  “Modifications to Quality Measures and Reporting in § 1915 (c) Home and
  Community Based Waivers.” This document:
   •    Revised the guidance on quality assurances related to health and welfare in
        recognition of the importance of tracking services to prevent incidents of abuse,
        neglect, and exploitation;

   •    Modified the assurance and sub-assurances related to health and welfare to allow for
        more extensive tracking of incidents.

   •    Established the following assurance: “The state demonstrates it has designed and
        implemented an effective system for assuring waiver participants health and welfare.”

       “Incident Management 101.” (2018) Retrieved from https://www.Medicaid.gov/Medicaid/hcbs/downloads/.../incident-
                                                     management-101.pdf




                                                                                                                     5
                                  Revised Guidance cont’d

• Four new sub-assurances were also created:
   • The state demonstrates on an ongoing basis that it identifies, addresses and
     seeks to prevent instances of abuse, neglect, exploitation and unexplained
     death.
   • The state demonstrates that an incident management system is in place that
     effectively resolves incidents and prevents further similar incidents to the
     extent possible.
   • The state policies and procedures for the use or prohibition of restrictive
     interventions (including restraints and seclusion) are followed.
   • The state establishes overall health care standards and monitors those
     standards based on the responsibility of the service provider as stated in the
     approved waiver.

       “Incident Management 101.” (2018) Retrieved from https://www.Medicaid.gov/Medicaid/hcbs/downloads/.../incident-
                                                     management-101.pdf


                                                                                                                     6
DIVISION OF LONG TERM LIVING’S GUIDELINES FOR
         CRITICAL INCIDENT REPORTING




                                                7
                   What is a Critical Incident?


A Critical Incident is any actual or alleged event or situation that creates
a significant risk of substantial or serious harm to the physical or mental
health, safety or well-being of a DHHS waiver participant, Home Again
participant or PRIME participant.




                                                                          8
                   Critical Incident Reporting


State workers or Provider Case Managers have a duty to report critical
incidents if they have reason to believe that a vulnerable adult or child
is being abused, exploited or neglected.

State workers or Provider Case Managers must submit the critical
incident in Phoenix within 24 hours or the next business day after
discovery of the suspected or alleged abuse, neglect or exploitation.




                                                                            9
                      Types of Critical Incidents


SCDHHS also monitors for other reportable incidents. These are defined as
incidents involving death or serious harm to a beneficiary/participant.
Reportable incidents include:

➢ Abuse (intentionally inflicting or allowing to be inflicted physical injury on a
  vulnerable adult or child by an act or failure to act. Deliberately subjecting a
  vulnerable adult or child to threats or harassment or other forms of
  intimidating behavior. Abuse can be physical, verbal, psychological or sexual)




                                                                                     10
             Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix

➢Neglect (the failure or omission of a caregiver to provide the care, goods,
 or services necessary to maintain the health or safety of a vulnerable adult
 or child)

➢Exploitation (causing or requiring a vulnerable adult or child to engage in
 activity or labor which is against the reasonable and rational wishes of the
 vulnerable adult or child. Includes the improper, unlawful, or unauthorized
 use of funds, assets, property, power of attorney, guardianship, or
 conservatorship of a vulnerable adult or child by someone for the profit or
 advantage of that person or another person)


                                                                        11
              Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix

➢Unexplained deaths

➢Falls (resulting in death, injury requiring hospitalization, or injury that will
 result in permanent loss of function)

➢Traumatic injuries (e.g. third degree burns over more than ten (10%)
 percent of the body that result in death, require hospitalization, or result in
 a loss of function)




                                                                             12
             Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix

➢Unauthorized restraints (both chemical and physical, that results in death,
 hospitalization, or loss of function in an institutional setting only)

➢ Media related events (any report that presents a potential or harmful
 characterization of the Department of Health and Human Services or any
 of its contracted entities that involves a DHHS waiver participant, Home
 Again participant or PRIME participant)

➢Elopement (unexplained absence for more than 24 hours)



                                                                       13
                   Critical Incident Tracking In Phoenix

Tracking of Critical Incidents by State Workers and Provider Case Managers:

Abuse, Neglect, Exploitation – at a minimum, monthly update from APS. To
continue until APS provides a closure date or notifies of a report not accepted

Death, Falls, Traumatic injuries and Unauthorized Restraint – Single entry, no
additional tracking required
   •   Central Office may request additional follow up




                                                                          14
              Critical Incident Tracking In Phoenix

Media-related events and Elopement – at a minimum, weekly update until
resolved



NOTE: There will NOT be a notification in Phoenix that monitoring is due.
Long Term Living Quality Assurance will contact the State Worker or
Provider Case Manager if monitoring becomes delinquent.




                                                                       15
              Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix

Process for Recording a Critical Incident:
➢State worker or Provider Case Manager will pull the participant record and
 on the carousel select Critical Incidents.




                                                                       16
                 Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix
Process for Recording a Critical Incident:
Select New Critical Incident.




                                                          17
             Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix
Process for Recording a Critical Incident:
Select Program – Only programs with active applications for the participant
will show.




                                                                       18
              Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix
Select Critical Incident Type - Only one type can be chosen, see list below




                                                                         19
              Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix
Process for Recording a Critical Incident:
Select Critical Incident Type -




                                                       20
                Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix
Process for Recording a Critical Incident:
Incident Date – Date that the occurrence happened, not date that it is being
reported




                                                                       21
              Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix
Process for Recording a Critical Incident:
Description – Mandatory. Provide details of the incident and all involved
parties along with their relationship to the participant




                                                                        22
             Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix
Process for Recording a Critical Incident: • Source of Information: Source
name, Relationship to participant and phone number.




                                                                        23
             Critical Incident Reporting In Phoenix
Process for Recording a Critical Incident:
Then select save. Phoenix will automatically assign an Identification
number to reported incident.




                                                                        24
    Critical Incident Monitoring in Phoenix

Following a service coordination attempt, enter pertinent
information in the critical incident itself rather than the
participant narrative. This input should occur whether the
contact attempt is successful or unsuccessful




                                                              25
       Critical Incident Monitoring in Phoenix

When entering a service coordination update, begin by
selecting Critical Incidents from the PHX carousel. Then,
select the incident being updated.




                                                            26
           Critical Incident Monitoring in Phoenix


Next, select Record a
Service Coordination
Attempt




                                                     27
                     Critical Incident Monitoring in Phoenix


If case managers have successfully
completed a service coordination,
check-off the appropriate box.

Then, enter pertinent details in the
Additional Information box, and
Save.

If service coordination attempt was
unsuccessful, leave the contact box
unchecked, enter any pertinent
details in the Additional Information
box (“CM left voice mail for APS
worker requesting returned call
4/17/19,” for example) and Save.


                                                               28
                           Critical Incident Compliance

• SCDHHS has defined sanctions for failure to comply with Critical
  Incident reporting/monitoring policy as follows:

1st action:                              2nd action:                  3rd action:
SCDHHS QA will send a reminder to        SCDHHS QA will send a        CM/Provider Agency
CM, Provider agency and Area Office.     letter to CM & Provider      will not receive new
The email will include a reminder for    Agency notifying             referrals for sixty (60)
the CM/Provider Agency to contact        CM/Provider Agency has       days.
the AA/LTCM for assistance with          five (5) working days from
contacting APS if needed (refer to APS   the date letter sent to
Policy-Chapter 5).                       document service
**If no response from CM within five     coordination/follow-up
(5) working days of the email, move to   with APS staff before 3rd
2nd action.**                            action is taken.



                                                                                            29
                            Critical Incident Compliance

• In addition, SCDHHS has defined sanctions for failure to create a
  critical incident entry:

• Failure to create a critical incident in Phoenix 1st offense:
    • A letter will be sent to the CM/Provider Agency by Central Office staff after area office staff
       creates a complaint regarding the CM.
• Failure to file a critical incident in Phoenix 2nd offense:
    • CM/Provider Agency will not receive new referrals for sixty (60) days.




                                                                                                        30
                         Frequently Asked Questions

• What is a Critical Incident?
   •   A Critical Incident is any actual or alleged event or situation that creates a significant
       risk of substantial or serious harm to the physical or mental health, safety or well-
       being of a DHHS waiver participant, Home Again participant or PRIME participant.

• Are APS referrals for abuse, neglect, and exploitation considered a Critical
  Incident.
   •   Yes. All referrals made related to abuse, neglect and exploitation must be reported as
       a critical incident.

• Am I required to submit and monitor a Critical Incident that I did not refer
  or witness?
   •   Yes. Once a case manager is made aware of the referral, a critical incident report
       must be submitted. SCDHHS is responsible for reporting to the Centers for Medicare
       and Medicaid Services (CMS) all critical incidents involving our participants.


                                                                                                    31
                        Frequently Asked Questions

• How often am I required to monitor a Critical Incident?
   •   It depends on the type of Critical Incident being reported. Reports of abuse, neglect,
       and exploitation are required to be monitored monthly. However, elopements are
       required to be monitored weekly. Please refer to P&P 05.80 for a complete listing.

• Am I required to report Critical Incidents on individuals not enrolled in a
  waiver?
   •   No. Critical Incidents are to be reported on participants active in one of our waivers
       (Community Choices, HIV/AIDS or Mechanical Vent).

• What should I do if I suspect abuse, neglect, or exploitation of a non-waiver
  participant?
   •   Report it! You are considered a mandated reporter and must report. Document
       pertinent information in the individual’s narrative in Phoenix.


                                                                                                32
                       Frequently Asked Questions

• If a participant goes to the ER after a fall, is this reportable?
   •   No. Only in-patient admissions are reportable. Falls that did not result in
       hospitalization are captured during the annual re-evaluation assessment.

• Am I required to report a critical incident on a child enrolled in the
  Children’s Personal Care program?




                                                                                     33
