                         Mute your microphone whenever you’re not speaking.
PLEASE MUTE              Background noise can be an annoying distraction and
Unless You’re Speaking   stifle any meeting’s flow.
                                        NOT-MUTED         MUTED
                               Webex

                            MS Teams


                               Zoom
                                                ECHO?
                               Skype


                               Phone


                         If you are dialed in on the phone and not using the
 Hear an ECHO?           Computer Audio, please mute in 2 places – YOUR
                         CONFERENCE PROVIDER AND YOUR COMPUTER.


                                NOT-MUTED

                                                         MUTED
                                                          (Just click on the speaker)
     Environmental Modifications
              Gloria Farmer and Linda Ford
                    Regional Trainers
          Office of Waiver and Facility Services
South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services
Environmental Modifications




                              3
               Environmental Modifications

• This service must be participant-specific and for the benefit
  of the participant. Environmental modification must be
  necessary to ensure health, welfare and safety and enable
  the participant to function with greater independence in the
  home without which, the participant would require
  institutionalization.




                                                                  4
              Environmental Modifications

• The service must be cost-effective. The case manager (CM)
  must exercise professional judgment regarding the
  appropriateness of the service.

• The service is not intended for major home improvement,
  remodeling, or cosmetic improvements. The CM must
  explore other available community resources prior to
  requesting approval for this service.




                                                              5
               Environmental Modifications

• The need for environmental modifications must be evaluated
  in the home prior to authorization. The need for this service
  must be documented in the Home Assessment section of
  Phoenix. During the home visit, the CM must explain and
  obtain appropriate signatures on the Landowner Consent
  Form for all the environmental modification services.

• Exception: Authorization of fans or air conditioners does not
  require a Landowner Consent Form.




                                                                  6
               Environmental Modifications

• The CM will update the service plan to include the need for
  environmental modification.

• Prior approval must be requested via the service request
  section of the service plan in Phoenix.

• Note: There is a lifetime cap of $7,500. This includes the costs
  for ramps and enhanced environmental modifications.
  Requests to exceed this amount must be sent to the South
  Carolina Department of Health and Human Services
  (SCDHHS) Central Office for consideration and approval.




                                                                 7
                Environmental Modifications

                     Service Provider Report
• Prior to authorizing services, a participant, responsible party,
  and/or authorized representative must make a choice of
  provider for each waiver service.
    • Air Conditioner
    • Fan
    • Ramp




                                                                     8
               Environmental Modifications

                    Service Provider Report
• The CM will create the Service Provider Report (Provider
  Choice Form) located in Phoenix under the Service
  Authorization section.

• The CM will obtain provider choice(s) from the primary
  contact in order of preference.




                                                             9
               Environmental Modifications

                      Service Provider Report
• These choices may be obtained verbally, by mail or during an
  in-home visit. If the choices are made verbally, the CM will
  document the choices in the narrative, in the order of
  preference.

• The primary contact should be encouraged to contact chosen
  provider(s) to determine if the provider is willing to accept
  the referral and to determine how long it will take the
  provider to complete the work.




                                                              10
               Environmental Modifications

                   Service Provider Report
• Under no circumstances shall a CM assist the participant in
  choosing a provider.




                                                                11
               Environmental Modifications

                      Fans/Air Conditioners
• 1 Fan
• 1 Air Conditioner

• Can be authorized based on medical need.

• The CM will update the service plan to include the need for
  fan/air conditioner equipment.




                                                                12
               Environmental Modifications

                  Fans/Air Conditioners
• The Landowner Consent Form is not required for this service.
  The CM will update the service plan to include the need for
  fan/air conditioner equipment.

• Prior approval must be requested via the service request
  section of the service plan in Phoenix.

• Service Justification: Emphasize need based on health and
  safety related issues. Include date last item was received.




                                                                13
               Environmental Modifications

                      Air Conditioners
• Air conditioners must be 10,000 BTU. The established rate
  includes installation and a one-year in-home warranty.
  During this one-year warranty period, it is the responsibility
  of the provider to replace and/or repair the unit.




                                                                   14
               Environmental Modifications

                            Fans
• Box fans must have three (3) speeds.




                                             15
               Environmental Modifications

                   Fans/Air Conditioners
• The CM must verify service and satisfaction with the work
  completed by the provider, as appropriate, on the next
  scheduled contact after the authorization end date.

• If there are problems, the CM shall negotiate resolution of
  the problems and/or complaint with the provider.




                                                                16
Environmental Modifications - Ramps




                                      17
                Environmental Modifications

                             Ramps
• The need for this service must be evaluated in the home
  prior to authorizing the service.
• The CM will visit the participant’s home to assess the need
  for a ramp.

• This visit may be completed at
the next regularly scheduled home
visit unless there is a critical need
requiring an earlier visit.



                                                                18
               Environmental Modifications

                             Ramps
• During the home visit, the CM must explain and obtain
  appropriate signatures on the Landowner Consent Form. The
  consent form signature is to be obtained in Phoenix.

• If a hard copy form is used, the signed form must be scanned
  into Phoenix under the environmental modification scan tag.




                                                             19
            Environmental Modifications

                       Ramps
• Homeowner/Family Member Consent Form:




                                          20
             Environmental Modifications

                          Ramps
• Landowner’s Consent Form:




                                           21
               Environmental Modifications

                             Ramps
• The CM will obtain provider choice.
• The need for this service must be documented in the Home
  Assessment section of Phoenix.
• The CM will update the service plan to include the need for a
  ramp.
• Obtain prior approval.




                                                              22
              Environmental Modifications

                             Ramps
Service justification for ramps and enhanced modification
should include the following:

     Service Justification: State need based on mobility,
     accessibility, and/or health and safety issues. State
     homeowner consent was signed, and the document is in
     forms or has been scanned. Include amount currently
     spent to date towards lifetime cap.




                                                            23
               Environmental Modifications

                              Ramps
• Only one ramp may be authorized at a time for a participant.
• If a participant changes location and requests a new ramp or
  a participant’s current ramp is deemed unsafe, the CM may
  make a home visit to assess need.
• An additional ramp may be approved if the participant has
  changed locations and has not exceeded the $7500 lifetime
  cap.




                                                             24
              Environmental Modifications

                           Ramps
• When the ramp is completed, the provider must submit the
  Ramp Completion Form in Phoenix. Upon notification of
  receipt of the Ramp Completion Form via Phoenix, the CM
  must complete the Service Provision Form.




                                                             25
               Environmental Modifications

                              Ramps
• The start date is the date the Service Provision Form is
  created, and the end date is thirty (30) days later. The dollar
  amount to be entered on the Service Provision Form is the
  dollar amount indicated by the provider via the Ramp
  Completion Form.




                                                                    26
              Environmental Modifications

                              Ramps
• If there are issues with the ramp/environmental
  modification, the CM will proceed with creating and sending
  the Service Provision Form to the provider while the
  Environmental Modification Specialist is reviewing the
  complaint.

*Provider payment should not be delayed pending review by
the Environmental Modification Specialist.




                                                                27
               Environmental Modifications

                               Ramps
• Participants are responsible for ramp maintenance.
• The CM may request ramp inspection by the Environmental
  Modification Specialist if a ramp is deemed unsafe or the
  structure is compromised.
• The Environmental Modification Specialist will determine
  whether to approve ramp repair or replacement.
• The cost of ramps service is included in the $7,500 lifetime
  cap for environmental modification services.




                                                                 28
Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps




                                                29
   Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps

• If a participant requires a ramp and enhanced environmental
  modification, the CM must follow the same policy as outlined
  for ramps with some exceptions.




                                                            30
   Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps

• Prior approval for the environmental modification and the
  ramp must be requested separately in the service request
  section of the service plan in Phoenix.

• Prior approval is required prior to sending the request to the
  Environmental Modification Specialist via Phoenix.




                                                               31
  Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps

• Complete the Environmental Needs tab of the Home
  Assessment section in Phoenix.

• Complete the ramp form in the Home Assessment section in
  Phoenix.

• Indicate the type of enhanced environmental modification
  needed from the list in Phoenix.

• Send the request to the Environmental Modification
  Specialist via Phoenix.

• Wait for a response from the Environmental Modification
  Specialist through Phoenix before proceeding.


                                                             32
   Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps

• The Environmental Modification Specialist will assess the
  request and indicate via Phoenix when the request is ready
  for bidding.




• Note: If there is a critical need for the ramp and the participant
  cannot wait for the bid process for the enhanced environmental
  modification, the CM will authorize the ramp in accordance with the
  participant’s choice of provider and follow the process for the ramp
  service.




                                                                         33
   Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps

      Environmental Modification Provider Bidding Process
The providers serving the geographical area of the participant
will:
• Receive an email from the Environmental Modification
  Specialist and Phoenix notification inviting them to bid on the
  enhanced environmental modification.
• Access the details of the job including location and pictures in
  Phoenix.
• Submit a bid via Phoenix within one week.
• Once the bid period is closed, the Environmental
  Modification Specialist will award the job by notifying the
  winning bidder and the CM via Phoenix.


                                                                34
   Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps

• The CM must click on the notification to see the enhanced
  environmental modification project screen where the
  awarded bid dollar amount is shown.

• If the bid indicates the winning environmental modification
  provider must build the ramp, the CM will send a ramp
  referral to the winning environmental modification provider.

• If the bid does not indicate the winning environmental
  modification provider must build the ramp, the CM will send
  a ramp referral to the ramp providers of participant’s choice,
  in the order of preference.


                                                               35
   Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps

     Service Authorization for Environmental Modification
• The enhanced environmental modification provider indicates
  via Phoenix when the project(s) is completed.

• The CM will:
   • Click on the notification to see the enhanced environmental
     modification project screen where the awarded bid dollar amount is
     shown.
   • Click “Create Authorization.” Create a Service Provision Form for the
     environmental modification. The start date will be the date of the
     Service Provision Form is created and the end date will be thirty
     (30) days later.




                                                                         36
   Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps

              Service Authorization for Ramp
• When the ramp is completed, the provider must submit the
  Ramp Completion Form in Phoenix.

• The CM will:
   • Click on the notification of receipt of the Ramp Completion Form via
     Phoenix;
   • Click “Create Authorization”. Complete a Service Provision Form for
     the ramp. The start date is the date the Service Provision Form is
     created, and the end date is thirty (30) days later.




                                                                        37
   Enhanced Environmental Modification and Ramps

• The dollar amount of the Service Provision Form is the
  amount indicated by the provider via the Ramp Completion
  Form. The provider will bill through Care Call.

• If the participant and/or primary contact is dissatisfied or
  complains about the ramp or Enhanced Modification, an
  inspection by the Environmental Modification Specialist is
  needed, the CM will email Provider-
  Distribution@scdhhs.gov to request an inspection.




                                                                 38
Questions?




             39
