HCBS Provider Policy                                                               July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                 Adult Day Health Care Scope

     MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES FOR

                   ADULT DAY HEALTH CARE SERVICES
      A.     Objective
             The objective of Adult Day Health Care (ADHC) services is to restore,
             maintain, and promote the health status of Medicaid HCBS waiver
             participants through the provision of ambulatory health care and health-
             related supportive services in an ADHC center.

      B.     Conditions of Participation
             1. The ADHC provider must maintain a current Adult Day Care license
                from the South Carolina Department of Public Health (SCDPH) or an
                equivalent licensing agency for an out-of-state provider.

             2. The ADHC provider must meet the following requirements per 42.
                CFR 441.301 (c) (4):

                   a. The ADHC center must be integrated in and support full access of
                      individuals receiving Medicaid HCBS to the greater community.

                   b. The ADHC center cannot be located on the grounds of, or adjacent to, a
                      public institution. A public institution is defined as an inpatient facility
                      that is financed and operated by a county, state, municipality or other
                      unit of government.

                   c. The ADHC center cannot be located on a parcel of land that contains
                      more than one State licensed facility or be located in a building that is
                      publicly or privately operated and provides inpatient institutional
                      treatment.

                   d. The ADHC center must not resemble characteristics of an institution
                      (e.g., high walls/fences; have closed/locked gates).

                   e. All HCBS Setting requirements must be met as outlined in the Eligible
                      Providers Section of the HCBS Provider Manual.

             3. Providers must ensure that participants receive information regarding
                their rights and responsibilities while under the care of the center.
                These rights and responsibilities must include the following
                information:

                   a. Information referencing the participant’s right to have control over their
                      personal resources while under the care of center

                   b. Information which offers opportunities for interested participants
                      regarding employment

                   c. The assurance of the participants rights of privacy and respect and
                      freedom from coercion and restraint

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Policy                                                               July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                 Adult Day Health Care Scope

                   d. Detailed information on how and to whom to file a complaint

             4. Providers must use the automated systems mandated by SCDHHS to
                document and bill for the provision of services.

             5. Providers must accept or decline referrals from SCDHHS or OIDD
                within two (2) working days. Failure to respond must result in the loss
                of the referral.

             6. The provider must be responsible for verifying the participant’s
                Medicaid eligibility when it has accepted a referral and monthly
                thereafter to ensure continued eligibility. Providers can verify Medicaid
                eligibility for HCBS participants in the Phoenix Provider Portal on their
                dashboard. Providers can also refer to Provider Administrative and
                Billing Manual for additional information on eligibility determination

             7. Providers may use paperless filing systems. Electronic records must
                be made available upon request, and providers must have a reliable
                back-up system in the event their computer system shuts down.

      C.     Description of Services to Be Provided
             1. The unit of service must be a participant day of ADHC services
                consisting of a minimum of five (5) hours in the care of the center. The
                five (5) hours do not include transportation time. The unit of service
                must be a minimum of four (4) hours when the participant has a
                scheduled medical appointment requiring him or her to leave early or
                arrive late. If a participant arrives late or leaves early due to a medical
                appointment, the provider must notify the Case Manager.

                Note: When a participant needs to be at the center for more than five
                (5) hours per day due to no one being at home to care for participant,
                the ADHC must allow the participant to remain at the center for up to
                eight (8) hours.

             2. The ADHC center must operate at least eight (8) hours a day Monday
                through Friday. The center may operate on weekends; if serving
                waiver participants on weekends, the five (5) hour minimum standard
                still applies. The hours of operation may be any eight (8) hours
                between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The provider understands and
                accepts that any deviation in hours or days of operation during the
                contract period requires notice to and approval by the with the
                SCDHHS Program Director or designee for the services to be
                covered.

             3. The number of days a participant attends each week is determined
                through the Medicaid HCBS waiver service plan and indicated on the
                current Service Provision Form.

             4. The provider must either provide directly, or make sub-contractual
                arrangements (only nurses can be sub-contracted), for some but not


                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Policy                                                              July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                Adult Day Health Care Scope

                all the following non-billable services which are included in the daily
                rate:

                   a. Daily nursing services performed by a RN or under the supervision of a
                      RN as permissible under State law to monitor vital signs as needed; to
                      observe the functional level of the participant and note any changes in
                      the physical condition of each participant; to supervise the
                      administration of medications and observe for possible reactions; to
                      teach positive health measures and encourage self-care; to coordinate
                      treatment plans with the participant and/or family member, the
                      physician, therapist, and other involved service delivery agencies; to
                      supervise the development and implementation of a care plan; to
                      appropriately report to the participant's physician and/or the Case
                      Manager any changes in the participant's condition. The RN must
                      approve the documentation of the services provided.

                   b. Supervision of, assistance with and training in personal care and
                      activities of daily living including dressing, personal hygiene, grooming,
                      bathing and clothing maintenance.

                   c. Daily planned therapeutic activities to stimulate mental activity,
                      communication and self-expression. These include reality orientation
                      exercises, crafts, music, educational and cultural programs, games,
                      etc. Participants must be given the opportunity to give input regarding
                      the types of activities they would like to do at the center. They must
                      also have alternative activities available in the event they do not want
                      to participate in the planned activity.

                   d. Outside activities must be offered for individuals attending the center to
                      afford them the opportunity to interact with individuals without
                      disabilities and in the community outside of the center.

                   e. One meal and one snack per day with the meal meeting 1/3 of the
                      daily recommended dietary allowances (RDA) for this age group as
                      adopted by the United States Department of Agriculture. Special diets
                      prescribed by the attending physician must be planned and prepared
                      with consultation from a registered dietitian as needed.

             5. The provider must incorporate in the center’s operational procedures
                adequate safeguards to protect the health and safety of the
                participants in the event of a medical or other emergency.

      D.     Staffing
             1. The minimum staffing requirements must be consistent with SCDPH
                licensing requirements (i.e., one direct-care staff for every eight
                participants). In addition to the minimum staffing standards required
                by SCDPH licensing, the following staffing standards for nurses and
                case managers apply whenever HCBS waiver participants are
                present. All nurse staffing and care must be provided in accordance
                with the South Carolina Nurse Practice Act. If the RN position become


                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Policy                                                             July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                               Adult Day Health Care Scope

                vacant, the ADHC Provider must notify SCDHHS at provider-
                distribution@scdhhs.gov no later than the next business day. The
                SCDHHS Program Director or designee must approve any deviations
                from these staffing patterns in writing.

                For 1-44 HCBS waiver ADHC participants: one RN must be present
                as follows:

                1 – 10 participants 2 hours minimum

                11 – 20 participants      3 hours minimum

                21 – 25 participants      4 hours minimum

                26 – 35 participants      5 hours minimum

                36 – 44 participants      6 hours minimum

                For 45 – 88 HCBS waiver ADHC participants: one RN and one
                additional RN or LPN must be present for a minimum of five hours
                whenever Home and Community-Based waiver participants are
                present.

                For 89 – 133 HCBS waiver ADHC participants:

                one RN and two additional RNs or LPNs; or

                one RN, one additional RN or LPN and one case manager.

                Required nursing and case management staff must be present for a
                minimum of five (5) hours whenever Home and Community-Based
                waiver participants are present.

                For 134 - or more HCBS waiver ADHC participants:

                one RN and three additional RNs or LPNs; or,

                one RN, and two additional RNs or LPNs and one case manager.

                Required nursing and case management staff must be present for a
                minimum of five hours whenever HCBS waiver participants are
                present.

             2. The provider must have a nursing supervisor on staff with the following
                qualifications:

                   a. A Registered Nurse (RN) currently licensed by the S.C. State Board of
                      Nursing, or by an appropriate licensing authority of the state in which
                      the ADHC provider is located for an out-of-state provider; and

                   b. A minimum of one year’s experience in a related health or social
                      services program; and


                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Policy                                                              July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                Adult Day Health Care Scope

                   c. A minimum of one year’s administrative or supervisory experience.

                   d. Provider must verify nurse licensure at time of employment and ensure
                      that the license remains active and in good standing at all times during
                      employment. A copy of the verification of the current license must be
                      maintained in the employee’s personnel file. Nurse licensure can be
                      verified and printed at the State Board of nursing website:

                        https://verify.llronline.com/LicLookup/Nurse/Nurse.aspx?div=17

             3. For ADHC providers with eighty-nine (89) or more Home and
                Community-Based waiver participants who employ a case manager to
                meet staffing requirements of section D. 1, the case manager must
                have a bachelor’s degree in health or social services.


             4. The provider must check the CNA registry for all staff prior to hire then
                at least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search results page
                must be maintained in each employee’s personnel file. Anyone on the
                CNA Registry with a revoked license is not allowed to provide
                services to waiver participants or participate in any Medicaid funded
                programs. The website addresses are listed below:

                   CNA Registry: https://cna365.examroom.ai/registry/?StateCode=SC

             5. The provider must check the OIG exclusions lists for all staff prior to
                hire then at least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search
                results page must be maintained in each employee’s personnel file.
                Anyone on the OIG Registry is not allowed to provide services to
                HCBS waiver participants or participate in any Medicaid funded
                programs. The website address is listed below:

                  OIG Exclusions List: https://exclusions.oig.hhs.gov/

             6. Purified Protein Derivative (PPD) Tuberculin Test

                   Please refer to the SCDPH website, Regulation 61-75 – Standards
                   for Licensing Day Care Facilities for Adults for PPD Tuberculin
                   test requirements.

                   https://dph.sc.gov/sites/scdph/files/media/document/R.61-75.pdf

                   For additional information, providers must contact the Tuberculosis
                   Control Division, Department of Public Health, 1751 Calhoun
                   Street, Columbia, SC 29201, phone (803) 898-0558.

             7. A SLED criminal background check is required for all employees prior
                to hire and at least every two years thereafter to include employees
                who provide direct care to Medicaid participants and all
                administrative/office employees (office employees required to have
                SLED background checks include: administrator, office manager,

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Policy                                                               July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                 Adult Day Health Care Scope

                supervisor, and persons named on organizational chart in
                management positions). All SLED criminal background checks must
                include all data for the individual. The SLED criminal background
                check must include statewide (South Carolina) data. The statewide
                data must include South Carolina and any other state or states the
                worker has resided in within the prior ten (10) years. Potential
                employees must not have prior convictions or have pled no contest
                (nolo contendere) to crimes related to theft, abuse, neglect, or
                exploitation of a child or a vulnerable adult for child or adult abuse,
                neglect or mistreatment, or a criminal offense similar in nature to the
                crimes listed in S.C. Code Section 43-35-10 et seq. Potential
                employees with non-violent felonies dating back ten (10) or more
                years can provide services to Medicaid participants under the
                following circumstances:

                        a. Participant/responsible party must be notified of the
                           employee’s SLED criminal background, i.e., felony
                           conviction, year of conviction.

                        b. Documentation signed by the participant/responsible party
                           acknowledging awareness of the employee’s SLED
                           criminal background and agreement to attend the center
                           must be placed in the participant record.

             8. Potential administrative/office employees with non-violent felony
                convictions dating back ten (10) or more years can work in the center
                at the provider’s discretion.

             9. Hiring of employees with misdemeanor convictions must be at the
                provider’s discretion. Employees hired prior to July 1, 2007, and
                continuously employed since then must not be required to have a
                SLED criminal background check.

             10. Personnel Records

                The provider must maintain personnel records, for each employee,
                including contracted personnel and volunteers, which document that
                they meet all qualifications as outlined in this document. Personnel
                records must contain at minimum the following:

                   a.     employee application/resume,

                   b.     background checks,

                   c.     CNA registry check,

                   d.     OIG report,

                   e.     PPD testing, and

                   f.     verification of current nurse’s license (for nursing staff only).


                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Policy                                                                July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                  Adult Day Health Care Scope

                   Other documents that must be maintained in employee records as
                   applicable: first aid certification, CPR certification, driver’s license
                   and driving record.

      E.     Conduct of Service
             The provider must maintain documentation showing that it has complied
             with all the requirements of this section.

             1. The provider must be notified by the Case Manager of the pending
                referral.

             2. Following notification of the referral, the provider must obtain the
                SCDHHS Form 122 DC from the physician and notify the Case
                Manager when they have received the completed form from the
                physician. The form must include recommendations regarding
                limitations of activities, special diet, and medications. The Case
                Manager must authorize the amount, duration and frequency of
                services for the participants in accordance with the participants’
                needs. Subsequent physical examination or periodic health screening
                to determine the participant's ability to continue in the program is
                required at least every two (2) years. The ADHC provider is
                responsible for procuring the initial and all subsequent physical
                examination reports. A blank copy of this form can be obtained in the
                Help section of the Phoenix Provider Portal.

             3. For HCBS waiver participants, the provider’s RN must prepare a care
                plan for the participant based on the current HCBS service plan.
                When there is a change in the current HCBS service plan that will
                affect the ADHC service, the provider’s RN must update their care plan
                to reflect the change.

             4. For OIDD waiver participants, the Case Manager must submit a
                service authorization. The service authorization, in addition to
                SCDHHS Form 122DC obtained by the ADHC provider, must be used
                to develop a ADHC care plan.

             5. The participant and/or their family member must be included in the
                development of their care plan. The care plan must also include
                information regarding the participant’s goals, likes, dislikes, etc. The
                ADHC must visibly post information or provide information to the
                participants and/or responsible party about how to request and
                schedule a planning meeting. If information is provided,
                documentation must be maintained in the participants’ record.
                Information about filing a complaint regarding the ADHC or ADHC
                services must be provided to the Participant and/or Responsible Party
                upon entry into the program and yearly during the care plan
                development meeting. The complaint information must contain, at a
                minimum, the name of the person(s) to whom the complaint must be
                made, that persons’ telephone number(s) and address(es). The first
                point of contact must be a person employed by the provider. The

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
HCBS Provider Policy                                                              July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                Adult Day Health Care Scope

                second point of contact must be any related licensing agency (DPH,
                LLR, etc.). Documentation that the complaint information was given to
                the Participant/Responsible Party must be maintained in the
                Participant’s record. Information about filing a complaint must be
                visibly posted for participants in the ADHC. The provider must give the
                participant written information regarding advanced directives; the
                participant is required to sign and date a statement that they have
                received this information; and the nurse supervisor is also required to
                sign and date the statement.

             6. Prior to the start of services, the provider must complete the ADHC
                Mode of Transportation Form including who will be responsible for the
                transportation. Updates to the information must be completed as
                needed. The ADHC Mode of Transportation Form must be maintained
                in the participant’s record.

             7. The provider must initiate ADHC services on the date agreed upon by
                the case manager, provider, and participant. and indicated on the
                service authorization. The case manager must be notified if services
                are not initiated on that date. Services provided prior to the authorized
                start date are not reimbursable.

             8. The provider is responsible for providing daily planned activities and
                must maintain documentation showing the following requirements
                have been met:

                   a. Obtaining input from the Participants for the planning of the activity
                      calendar and maintain documentation of this input. The activity calendar
                      must reflect activities that are age appropriate.

                   b. Ensuring alternative activities are available and offered if a participant
                      is not interested in participating in a planned activity.

                   c. Providing a variety of community guest speakers and/or presenters for
                      programming/activity with the Participants based on their interests
                      and/or needs. Documentation of this must be maintained on the activity
                      calendar.

                   d. Communicating with the Participant’s family and/or case manager
                      about the Participant’s interest in community events and/or resources.
                      Documentation of this communication must be maintained in the
                      Participant’s record.

             9. The provider must develop and maintain a Policy and Procedure
                Manual, which describes how activities must be performed in
                accordance with the terms of their contract with SCDHHS.

             10. The provider must maintain a daily attendance log documenting the
                 arrival and departure times of each participant. A separate log must be
                 maintained indicating staff in attendance and their arrival and
                 departure times.


                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 8
HCBS Provider Policy                                                               July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                 Adult Day Health Care Scope

             11. The provider must notify the case manager within two (2) working days
                 of the following participant changes:

                   a. Participant's condition has changed, or the participant no longer
                      appears to need ADHC services.

                   b. Participant is institutionalized, dies or moves out of service area.

                   c. Participant no longer wishes to participate in ADHC services.

                   d. Provider becomes aware of the participant's Medicaid ineligibility or
                      potential ineligibility.

                   e. Participant does not attend the day care on an authorized day and
                      Provider has not been notified of reason for absence.

                   f.   Report of abuse, neglect, or exploitation has been made to the
                        appropriate entities.

             12. The provider must maintain a record keeping system which
                 establishes a participant profile in support of the units of ADHC
                 services delivered, based on the Medicaid HCBS waiver service
                 authorization. Individual participant records must be maintained and
                 contain the

                   a. Service authorization,

                   b. ADHC’s care plan (which is approved and signed by the provider’s
                      RN),

                   c. Mode of Transportation Form ,

                   d. SCDHHS Form 122 DC,

                   e. Right to Complain documentation,

                   f.   Advanced Directive documentation, and

                   g. Daily documentation of all care and activities provided. Daily
                      documentation must be made available to SCDHHS/OIDD upon
                      request.

                   For SCDHHS authorized services, the ADHC care plan must be
                   based on the current HCBS Service Plan and must include input
                   from the participant and/or their representative. The current and
                   previous HCBS Service Plan must be maintained in the participant’s
                   file.

                   For OIDD waiver participants, the ADHC care plan must be
                   based on the participant’s assessment, the SCDHHS Form 122DC
                   and must include input from the participant and/or their
                   representative. This information must be maintained in the

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 9
HCBS Provider Policy                                                              July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                Adult Day Health Care Scope

                   participant file.

             13. The provider must allow Participants to come and go from the facility
                 and grounds as they are able. Participants shall move about the
                 facility, inside and outside, as they are able.

             14. The provider must ensure that health related activities and personal
                 care activities are performed in a private location.


      F.     Administrative Requirements
             1. The provider must inform SCDHHS of the provider’s organizational
                structure, including the provider personnel with authority and
                responsibility for employing qualified personnel, ensuring adequate
                staff education and employee evaluations. The provider agency shall
                notify SCDHHS within three (3) working days in the event of a change
                in the agency administrator, address, phone number or an extended
                absence of the agency administrator.

             2. The provider must provide SCDHHS with a written document showing
                the organization administrative control and lines of authority for the
                delegation of responsibility down to the hands-on participant care level
                staff at contract implementation. The document must include an
                organizational chart including names of those currently in the
                positions. Revisions or modifications to this organizational document
                must be provided to SCDHHS. It is recommended that this document
                be readily accessible to all staff.

             3. Administrative and supervisory functions shall not be delegated to
                another agency or organization.

             4. The provider agency shall acquire and maintain during the life of the
                contract liability insurance and workers’ compensation insurance as
                provided in Article IX, Section D of the Contract. The provider is
                required to list SCDHHS – as a Certificate Holder for informational
                purposes only on all insurance policies using the following address:
                Post Office Box 8206, Columbia, SC 29202-8206.

                   Failure to maintain the required insurance must result in
                   termination of your contract with SCDHHS.

             5. The provider must update their holidays in Phoenix annually. The
                provider will not be required to furnish services on their designated
                holidays. A copy of the scheduled holiday list must be posted in a
                visible location at the center.

             6. Participants’ health information and records must be stored in a
                central location, locked in a secure area and only accessible to
                professional staff.

             7. The provider must maintain Participants’ therapy schedules,

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 10
HCBS Provider Policy                                                              July 1, 2025
Scope of Services                                                Adult Day Health Care Scope

                medication schedules/records, and special diets in a private secure
                location where others cannot view.

             8. The provider shall ensure that key agency staff are accessible in
                person or by phone during normal business hours as well as during
                compliance review audits conducted by SCDHHS and/or its agents.
                Providers are required to keep documentation records, including
                medical records, in chronological order.

             9. The provider must comply with Article IX, Section Y, of the Contract
                regarding safety precautions. The Provider must also have an on-
                going infectious disease education program to prevent the spread of
                infectious disease among its employees and participants. At
                minimum, the infectious disease education program must include the
                following

                   a. Definition of infectious disease

                   b. How an infectious disease is spread

                   c. How to provide services in a way that prevents the spread of an
                      infectious disease (universal precautions, etc.)


             10. SCDHHS reimburses ADHC transportation services through a Broker
                 System. Under this system, the Broker(s) must be responsible for the
                 administration and provision of non-emergency medical transportation
                 (NEMT) services to eligible Medicaid recipients within the state. ADHC
                 providers with questions regarding ADHC transportation contracts
                 must contact ModivCare via email at SCNetwork@modivcare.com or
                 by phone at (866) 910- 7684.

             11. If at any time the ADHC provider chooses to stop providing
                 transportation through contract with ModivCare, the participant must
                 be given at least 10 business days notification to ensure transportation
                 is scheduled with the Broker. The ADHC provider must ensure that
                 standing orders with ModivCare are in place for ongoing
                 transportation with no break in transportation services.




                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 11
