                                Twelve Strike Policy
             Personal Care I and II, Children’s Personal Care, Attendant,
                         Companion and Nursing Services

One strike will be given to a worker for each incident where a resolution must be done
and no valid reason is given. After the twelfth strike, resolutions will no longer be
accepted if no valid and verified reason is given.

   •   The Electronic Visit Verification System includes Care Call and the mobile app.
       Workers who are new to the Electronic Visit Verification system (EVVS) will have
       a one-month grace period to learn the system before strikes begin to be issued.
       However, workers rehired or returning to work who will be using Care Call will not
       get this grace period since they should already know how to use Care Call.

   •   Workers will be given one strike per incident. For example, if worker is providing
       Personal Care I & II services for a participant and checks in for both services but
       fails to check out, only one strike will be given to correct both the PCI & PCII
       claims. If the worker checks in for multiple participants on the same call, only
       one strike will be given.

   •   After one year, each worker begins a new strike period. This means that the
       twelve-strike policy is an annual policy rather than a lifetime policy. For new
       workers, the annual date begins on the worker start date keyed in the worker
       registration section of Phoenix. The worker start date should always be the first
       day the worker will serve a participant to receive the full 30 day grace period.

   •   Each resolution not submitted timely will receive a strike. Providers must submit
       the resolution within 10 days from the Sunday following the Date of Service
       to be timely. Any resolutions submitted after that date will have strikes issued.
       These strikes will be assigned to the worker on the claim(s) although it is the
       responsibility of the provider agency to submit the resolutions timely.

   •   Division of Long Term Living’s CLTC Area Offices will have 14 days to respond
       to the provider agency resolutions that were submitted timely.

   •   Providers must use the participant’s landline phone or the mobile app to
       document services in the Electronic Visit Verification System. Any problems
       using the participant’s landline phone or the mobile app should be reported
       immediately (by the next business day). The best way to notify the case manager
       is by sending a conversation in Phoenix. Attendants must notify the Case
       Manager by phone. The Employer of Record will be able to provide the Case
       Managers contact information. If the landline phone is disconnected or not
       working when the provider arrives, a resolution may be done. The provider must
       be prepared to have a mobile app available to serve the participant by the third
       visit when the landline phone is out of service. If the provider cannot/ will not
       begin using the mobile app, the provider must notify the case manager by the
       third visit that they will no longer be able to provide services to the participant.
       The provider may continue to serve the participant, at the case manager’s
       request, until a new provider can be set up. No strikes will be given if this
       arrangement is made and documented.


March 2019
   •   If a participant has a landline phone but it is regularly out of service (2-3 times a
       month), the mobile app must be used for that participant.

   •   Providers may run the Infractions by Worker report on the Phoenix Provider
       Portal website to monitor the worker strikes.

Examples of when strikes will be given and will not be given

Strikes

   •   Worker forgets to check in but does check out
   •   Workers forgets to check out but does check in
   •   Worker forgets to check in and worker forgets to check out
   •   Resolutions submitted late


                      Non-Strikes


                          •   Worker makes a mistake during the grace period
                          •   Care Call or mobile app not working and central office
                          has said not to issue strikes
                          •   Local telephone provider problems that have been
                          verified by the area office
                          •   CM has been notified and verified participant’s phone
                          is not functioning
                          •   CM was notified and verified participant’s phone was
                          not available
                          •   Worker checks in with incorrect worker ID
                          •   Worker checks in for the incorrect service
   •   Participant’s phone not available and the provider DID NOT notify CM by
       the next business day
   •   Participant’s phone not functioning, and the provider DID NOT notify CM
       by the next business day




March 2019
