HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Standards of Services                                                    Advanced Pest Control

                        Advanced Pest Control Standards

      A.     Overview
         Advanced Pest Control services aid in maintaining an environment free of bedbugs to
         promote safety, sanitation, and cleanliness of the participant's residence. Once the
         existence of bedbugs is established as existent within the home, providers treat the
         residence to eliminate infestation. The provider must return to the home and provide re-
         treatment as necessary within a one-year warranty time frame from the authorization of
         initial treatment.

      B.     Description of Service:
         Advanced Pest Control provider sends the following information to the Case Manager:

               • Confirms bedbug infestation
               • States the specific type of treatment to be used
               • Provides photo or photos of bedbugs found
               • States the total cost of treatment
               • Describes the steps that must be taken by the participant in preparation for
                 successful treatment
               • Describes the likelihood of successful eradication
               • Agrees to provide fitted mattress covers for affected areas
               • Provides a written one-year warranty of service

         The provider provides the Case Manager with the above required documentation.
         Authorization for Advanced Pest Control must not be created until provider has
         confirmed eradication of bedbugs in Phoenix for the Case Manager. Advanced Pest
         Control may only be authorized once per lifetime.

         Any exceptions to this policy must be approved by WES@scdhhs.gov.

         The Advanced Pest Control provider must return to the home and provide re-treatment
         as necessary within the one (1) year warranty timeframe, which begins on the start date
         of the authorization.




                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
