HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                            Home Delivered Meals

                  MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES
                                             FOR


                 MEDICAID HOME DELIVERED MEALS

      A.        Objective
        The objective of Home Delivered Meal Services is to provide at least one (1)
        nutritionally sound meal per day to persons unable to care for their nutritional
        needs because of a functional disability/dependency and who require nutrition
        assistance to remain in the community.

      B.        Condition of Participation

           1.    Agencies desiring to be a provider of Home Delivered Meals (HDM) Services
                 must have at least one (1) year of demonstrated experience in food service
                 meal planning and preparation.

           2.    Providers must use the automated systems mandated by SCDHHS to
                 document and bill for the provision of services.

           3.    Providers must accept or decline referrals from SCDHHS or SCDDSN within
                 two (2) working days. Failure to respond must result in the loss of the
                 referral.

           4.    The provider must be responsible for verifying the participant’s Medicaid
                 eligibility when it has accepted a referral and monthly thereafter to ensure
                 continued eligibility. Providers can verify Medicaid eligibility for HCBS
                 participants in the Phoenix Provider Portal on their dashboard. Providers
                 may also refer to Administrative and Billing Manual for additional information
                 on eligibility determination.

           5.    Providers may use paperless filing systems. Electronic records must be
                 made available upon request, and providers must have a reliable back-up
                 system in the event their computer system shuts down. Provider must
                 ensure that the electronic record keeping meets all scope requirements and
                 any requirements set forth in the Administrative and Billing Manual.


      C.        Description of Services

           1.    The Unit of Service is one meal delivered to a participant’s residence, or
                 other location, as agreed to by the provider and as indicated on the service
                 authorization. Each meal must provide a minimum of one-third of the current
                 recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for the age group as adopted by the


                                        South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                            Home Delivered Meals

                 United States Department of Agriculture. The number of units of service
                 provided to each participant is determined by the participant’s service plan,
                 which is established by the case manager in consultation with the
                 participant.

           2.    Modified Diet menus must be developed using Dietary Guidelines for
                 Americans and must be reviewed and approved by a registered dietitian.
                 The provider must have procedures in place to assure that each participant
                 requiring a modified meal receives only the meal ordered for that individual.

           3.    Home delivered meals are made available at a minimum Monday through
                 Friday.

      D.        Conduct of Service

           1.    The provider must obtain authorization from the SCDHHS Case Manager
                 prior to the provision of services. The authorization must designate the
                 amount, frequency and duration of service for participants in accordance with
                 the participant’s service plan which must be developed in consultation with
                 the participant and/or responsible party. More than one meal for each day’s
                 consumption may be delivered if authorized by SCDHHS. The authorization
                 must indicate if the person requires a modified diet due to diabetes or some
                 other condition.

           2.    The provider must initiate home delivered meals on the date agreed upon
                 by the Case Manager, provider, and participant indicated on the service
                 authorization. Services must not be provided prior to the authorized start
                 date as stated on the service authorization.

           3.    Each provider must offer one (1) hot meal per day, five (5) or more days
                 each week, and any additional authorized meals may be hot or cold. Shelf
                 stable meals may be provided if authorized by the Case Manager and the
                 participant or responsible party requests this type of meal. A hot meal, for
                 the purposes of this program, is one in which the main food item is hot at the
                 time of serving. A blast-frozen meal, if authorized, meets the hot meal
                 requirement for this standard. (If the participant or responsible party agrees
                 and/or requests shelf stable meals, we must allow this option in lieu of hot or
                 frozen meals.)

           4.    No home-canned or home-prepared food shall be used in the preparation
                 and service of the meals.

           5.    The facility at which the meals are prepared and/or packaged, as well as the
                 manner of handling, transporting, serving and delivery of these meals must
                 meet all applicable health, fire safety and sanitation regulations.

           6.    Only single service covered aluminum foil or Styrofoam divided containers
                 can be used for hot food. Each tray compartment must be large enough to
                 contain the required portions without spillover.

           7.    Unless providing a blast frozen meal or shelf stable meal, hot and cold food

                                         South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                        July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                                  Home Delivered Meals

                  shall be portioned and packed separately to ensure retention of heat or cold
                  and shall be transported in approved insulated carriers which must maintain
                  the required hot (135 degrees Fahrenheit or above) and cold (41 degrees
                  Fahrenheit or below) temperatures until the time of delivery to the
                  participant. Blast frozen meals must be transported in approved insulated
                  carriers which must maintain the meals in a frozen state until the time of
                  delivery to the participant.

           8.     Delivery routes must be clearly established. No more than three (3) hours
                  shall elapse between the time of packaging and the time of delivery of the
                  last hot meal on the route. Delivery of a cold meal beyond the three (3) hour
                  limit for a participant who lives too far away may be made upon written
                  approval of the Head of the Provider Relations and Compliance Department,
                  LTSS Division of Waiver Management.

           9.     Meals must be received, in hand, by an individual at the participant’s door or
                  at another location as agreed to by the provider and as indicated on the
                  service authorization.

           10.    The provider shall give initial and on-going training in the proper service,
                  handling, and delivery of food to all staff, both volunteer and paid.

           11.    The provider must maintain a record keeping system which establishes an
                  eligible participant profile in support of units of Home Delivered Meal service
                  provided, based on the service authorization.

           12.    The provider must ensure the participant’s condition and must confirm at
                  least monthly that the participant continues to reside in the home and is
                  available to receive the meals. The provider must notify the case manager
                  as soon as possible, but no more than two (2) working days, after the
                  provider becomes aware of the following participant changes:

                  a.      Participant’s condition has changed, or participant no longer
                          appears to need home delivered meal services; or,
                  b.      Participant is institutionalized, dies or moves out of service area; or,

                  c.      Participant no longer wishes to receive home delivered meal services; or,

                  d.      Knowledge of the participant’s Medicaid ineligibility or potential ineligibility.

      E.         Administrative Requirements

           1.     The provider must inform SCDHHS of the Provider’s organizational
                  structure, including the provider personnel with authority and responsibility
                  for employing qualified personnel, ensuring adequate staff education, in-
                  service training and employee evaluations. The provider shall notify
                  SCDHHS within three (3) working days in the event of a change in or the
                  extended absence of the personnel with the above-listed authority.

           2.     The provider must provide SCDHHS with a written document showing the

                                           South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                         Home Delivered Meals

              organization administrative control and lines of authority for the delegation
              of responsibility down to the hands-on participant care level staff at contract
              implementation. The document must include an organizational chart
              including names of those currently in the positions. Revisions or
              modifications to this organizational document must be provided to SCDHHS.
              It is recommended that this document be readily accessible to all staff.

         3.   Administrative and supervisory functions must not be delegated to another
              agency or organization.

         4.   The provider agency must acquire and maintain for the duration of the
              contract liability insurance and worker’s compensation insurance as provided
              in Article IX, Section D of the Contract. The provider is required to list
              SCDHHS as a Certificate Holder for informational purposes only on all
              insurance policies using the following address: Post Office Box 8206,
              Columbia, SC 29202-8206.

         5.   The provider must update their holidays in Phoenix. The provider is not
              required to furnish services on those days.




                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
