HCBS Provider Manual                                                           July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                Case Management Services

       MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES

                                            FOR

                  INSTITUTIONAL RESPITE CARE
      A.    Objective
        The objective of Institutional Respite Care Services is to provide temporary
        institutional care for Medicaid waiver participants who live at home and are
        cared for by their families or other informal support systems.

      B.    Conditions of Participation
       1.   The Institutional Respite Care Provider must maintain a current license as
            a hospital, nursing facility (NF) or Intermediate Care Facility for
            Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities (ICF/IID) from SCDPH or an
            equivalent licensing agency for an out-of-state provider.

       2.   Providers must accept or decline referrals from LTSS or SCDDSN within
            two (2) working days. Failure to respond will result in the loss of the
            referral.

       3.   The provider is responsible for verifying the participant’s Medicaid
            eligibility when it has accepted a referral and monthly thereafter to ensure
            continued eligibility. Providers can verify Medicaid eligibility for LTSS
            participants in the Phoenix Provider Portal on their dashboard. Providers
            must also refer to Administrative and Billing Manual of this provider
            manual for additional information on eligibility determination.

       4.   Providers may use paperless filing systems. When using electronic filing
            systems any documentation requiring signatures must be signed prior to
            scanning. Electronic records must be made available upon request, and
            providers must have a reliable back-up system in the event their
            computer system shuts down.

      C.    Description of Services to be Provided
       1.   Respite care must be provided in a hospital, nursing facility (NF), or an
            Intermediate Care Facility for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities
            (ICF/IID) that has been approved by the state and is not a private
            residence.

       2.   The unit of service is a patient day. A patient day is defined as a twenty-
            four (24) hour period, including the day of admission and excluding the
            day of discharge.

       3.   Total patient days allowed per fiscal year (July 1 – June 30) is fourteen
            (14). This includes any Community Residential Care Facility Respite
            days, if applicable. The 14-day limit does not apply to DDSN waiver
            participants.

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                           July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                Case Management Services

       4.   The number of units of service provided to each participant is dependent
            upon the individual participant's needs as set forth in the participant's
            service plan, which is established or approved by the Case Manager.

       5.   The per diem rate includes all items and supplies associated with patient
            care, except prescribed drugs and personal items. These items cannot be
            billed by the Provider to Medicaid or the participant.

       6.   Examples of items included in the per diem rate are: durable medical
            equipment, nonprescription drugs, underpads, suctioning equipment and
            supplies, and NG tube equipment and feeding supplies. Other examples
            include supplies necessary for dressing changes, ostomy catheters, and
            tracheostomy care items.

       7.   Examples of personal care items are soap, mouthwash, deodorant,
            shampoo, and clothing.

       8.   Respite Care Services must be based on the participant’s physician,
            nurse practitioner, or physician’s assistant orders.



      D.    Conduct of Service
       1.   The Case Manager must authorize Institutional Respite Care Services by
            designating the amount, frequency and duration of the services for the
            participant in accordance with the participant’s service plan. Services must
            not be provided prior to the authorized start date as stated on the service
            authorization form.

       2.    Prior to the time of admission to Institutional Respite Care, the Case
             Manager must send the provider the SCDHHS Form 122RC which
             includes the physician’s admission order, the participant’s medical
             history, a physical examination report that is not over five (5) days old
             and the participant’s service plan. If it is not possible to obtain the
             SCDHHS Form 122RC prior to admission, the Case Manager must send
             a copy of the medical information from the Medicaid waiver assessment
             form in lieu of the medical history and the provider must obtain a physical
             examination report within forty-eight (48) hours of admission.

       3.    Upon request of the Case Management for Institutional Respite Care
             services, the provider must secure a prior admission agreement with the
             primary care giver or responsible party. This agreement must set forth
             the scheduled period of placement, specifying admission and discharge
             dates, and must include a statement of understanding and agreement
             for the responsible party to resume care of the participant after the
             authorized respite period.

       4.    The provider must establish a participant file, which includes the
             physician, nurse practitioner, or physician’s assistant respite orders
             (SCDHHS Form 122RC), the Home and Community-Based waiver
             service authorization, the facility plan of care and documentation of all

                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                          July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                               Case Management Services

             care and services provided.

       5.    The provider must notify the Case Manager within twenty-four (24) hours
             if the participant is admitted to the hospital, dies, returns home or no
             longer requires Institutional Respite Care services.

       6.    For DDSN waiver participants, institutional respite services may not be
             billed in conjunction with the residential habilitation service.

       7.    A 2-step PPD is required prior to authorization of the service. The first
             step of the PPD must be completed prior to admission and the second
             step may be completed after admission.

      E.    Administrative Requirements
       1.   The provider must inform SCDHHS of the provider’s organizational
            structure, including the provider personnel with authority and
            responsibility for employing qualified personnel, ensuring adequate staff
            education, in-service training, and employee evaluations. The provider
            shall notify SCDHHS within three (3) working days in the event of a
            change in or the extended absence of the personnel with the above-listed
            authority.

       2.   The provider must provide SCDHHS with a written document showing the
            organization, administrative control and lines of authority for the
            delegation of responsibility down to the hands-on participant care level
            staff at contract implementation. The document must include an
            organizational chart including names of those currently in the positions.
            Revisions or modifications to this organizational document must be
            provided to SCDHHS. It is recommended that this document be readily
            accessible to all staff.

       3.   Administrative and supervisory functions shall not be delegated to
            another agency or organization.

       4.   The provider agency must acquire and maintain for the duration of the
            contract liability insurance and worker’s compensation insurance as
            provided in Article IX, Section D of the Contract. The provider is required
            to list SCDHHS as a Certificate Holder for informational purposes only on
            all insurance policies using the following address: Post Office Box 8206,
            Columbia, SC 29202-8206.




                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
