HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                           Nursing Services

       MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES

                                                    FOR

                               NURSING SERVICES
      A.        Objective
                The objective of nursing services is to provide skilled medical monitoring,
                direct care, and intervention to maintain the participant through home
                support. This service is necessary to avoid institutionalization.

      B.        Conditions of Participation
           1.           Agencies desiring to be a provider of Medicaid Nursing services
                        must have demonstrated experience in providing nursing services
                        or a similar service. Experience must include at least three (3)
                        years of health care experience, one of which must be in
                        administration.

           2.           Agencies must have certified evidence of not less than $10,000.00
                        operating capital. This capital is required so that the provider
                        agency has the capability to operate for a minimum of 60 days in
                        the event Medicaid reimbursement is delayed or withheld for any
                        reason. Certified evidence of operating capital includes, but is not
                        limited to, a written statement from an officer of a financial
                        institution or a certified accountant; a copy of your most recent
                        bank statement must be included. Operating capital must be
                        verified prior to initiating a contract and periodically during the
                        contract period.

           3.           Provider agencies must be housed in an office that is in a
                        commercially zoned or unzoned area. Any agency not housed
                        within a commercial or unrestricted/unzoned location must be prior
                        approved by SCDHHS to enroll as a nursing services provider.

           4.           Agencies requesting prior approval must submit the following
                        documents/evidence:

                   a.   County/municipal zoning permit to operate a business

                   b. Business licenses as required

                   c. Evidence agency meets applicable county/municipal, mixed-use zoning
                      guidelines

                   d. Pictures exhibiting:




                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                            July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                         Nursing Services

                        i.    Business entrance door

                       ii.    Office space devoted entirely for the business; space must be
                              enclosed and have a locking door

                       iii.   Outside business sign conforming to county/municipal sign and
                              zoning codes

           5.        Agencies must utilize the automated systems mandated by
                     SCDHHS to document and bill for the provision of services.

           6.        Providers must accept or decline referrals from SCDHHS or
                     SCDDSN within two (2) working days. Failure to respond will
                     result in the loss of the referral.

           7.        The provider must verify the participant’s Medicaid eligibility when
                     it accepts an authorization and monthly thereafter to ensure
                     continued eligibility. Agencies can verify Medicaid eligibility for
                     SCDHHS participants in the Phoenix Provider Portal on their
                     dashboard or by utilizing the Medicaid Web Tool. Providers must
                     also refer to the Administrative and Billing Manual for additional
                     information on eligibility determination.

           8.        Providers may use paperless filing systems. Electronic records
                     must be made available upon request, and providers must have a
                     reliable back-up system in the event their computer system shuts
                     down. Provider must ensure that the electronic record keeping
                     meets all scope requirements and any requirements set forth in
                     the Administrative and Billing Manual.

      C.        Description of Services to be Provided
           1.        The unit of service is one (1) hour of direct nursing care provided
                     to the participant in the participant's natural environment. Services
                     are not allowable when the participant is in an institution. The
                     amount of time authorized does not include travel time. Services
                     provided without a current, valid authorization are not
                     reimbursable.

           2.        The number of units and services provided to each participant are
                     determined by the individual participant's needs as set forth in the
                     Service Plan/Authorization.

           3.        Nursing services providers must provide skilled nursing services as
                     ordered by the physician, nurse practitioner, or physician’s
                     assistant performed by a registered nurse (RN) or licensed
                     practical nurse (LPN) in accordance with SC Nurse Practice Act
                     Title 40 Chapter 33. In addition, providers must assist with/perform
                     ADLs as needed.

           4.        The Provider must ensure that, when serving Participants, its
                     nurses and supervisors display a photo identification badge

                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                             July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                          Nursing Services

                       identifying the provider and the employee.

      D.        Staffing
           1.          The provider must maintain individual records for all employees.
                       Required documentation must be filed in the personnel file within
                       fifteen (15) days of employment or of receipt. Employee records
                       must contain at minimum:

                  a. the application/resume,

                  b. background check,

                  c. OIG report,

                  d. verification of current nurse’s license,

                  e. PPD documentation,

                  f.   documentation of experience, and

                  g. in-service training documentation.

           2.          The provider must employ a RN or LPN that meets the following
                       requirements:

                  a. Supervised by an RN. The nurse supervisor must be accessible by phone
                     during any hour services are being provided under this contract. If the
                     nurse supervisor position becomes vacant, SCDHHS must be notified no
                     later than the next business day.

                  b. Licensed to practice nursing by the South Carolina Board of Nursing. The
                     provider must verify nurse licensure at time of employment and ensure
                     that the license always remains active and in good standing during
                     employment. A copy of the current license verification must be maintained
                     in the employee’s personnel file. Nurse licensure can be verified and
                     printed at the State Board of nursing website:

                       https://verify.llronline.com/LicLookup/Nurse/Nurse.aspx?div=17

                  c. Has at least one (1) year of experience in public health, hospital, or long-
                     term care nursing;

           3.          Ensure that nurses serving participants with any of the following
                       medical conditions must have additional training in caring for the
                       person’s medical needs:

                  a. tracheostomy,

                  b. mechanical ventilation,

                  c. gastric or jejunostomy tubes,


                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                          July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                       Nursing Services

               d. and indwelling catheters.

         4.       The provider must conduct a State Law Enforcement Division
                  (SLED) criminal background check for all employees prior to hire
                  and at least every two years thereafter to include employees who
                  provide direct care to SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants and all
                  administrative/office employees. All SLED criminal background
                  checks must include all data for the individual with no less than a
                  ten (10) year timeframe being searched. The SLED criminal
                  background check must include statewide (South Carolina) data.
                  The statewide data must include South Carolina and any other
                  state or states the worker has resided in within the prior ten years.
                  Potential employees with felony convictions within the last ten (10)
                  years cannot provide services to SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants
                  or work in an administrative/office position. Potential employees
                  with non-violent felonies dating back ten (10) or more years can
                  provide services to SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants under the
                  following circumstances:

                       •   Participant/responsible party must be notified of the nurse’s
                           SLED criminal background.
                       •   The provider must obtain a written statement, signed by the
                           participant/responsible party acknowledging awareness of
                           the nurse’s SLED criminal background and agreement to
                           have the nurse provide care; this statement must be placed
                           in the participant record.


                  Potential administrative/office employees with non-violent
                  felony convictions dating back ten (10) or more years can work
                  in the agency at the discretion of the provider.

                  Hiring employees with misdemeanor convictions i s at the
                  discretion of the provider.

         5.       The provider must check the OIG exclusions lists for all staff prior
                  to hire then at least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search
                  results page must be maintained in each employee’s personnel
                  file. Anyone on the OIG Registry is not allowed to provide services
                  to waiver participants or participate in any Medicaid funded
                  programs. The website addresses are listed below:

                  OIG Exclusions List: https://exclusions.oig.hhs.gov/

         6.       By September 30 of each year, the provider must submit a
                  statement certifying that all professional staff are appropriately and
                  currently licensed. Statement must be submitted by email to:
                  Provider-distribution@scdhhs.gov.

         7.       In addition, services must also adhere to the following:

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                           Nursing Services

                   a. The RN supervisor must always be accessible by phone the RN or LPN is
                      on duty; and,

                   b. The RN supervisor must decide the frequency of supervisory visits based
                      on his/her professional knowledge of the participant’s situation and health
                      status; however, this may be no less frequently than every ninety (90) In
                      the event the participant is inaccessible during the time the visit would
                      have normally been made, the visit must be completed within five

                   c. (5) working days of the resumption of Nursing services. These visits must
                      include a re-evaluation of the participant’s condition as well as updating of
                      the plan of care.

           8.          Agency Staff may be related to participants served by the agency
                       within limits allowed by the South Carolina Family Caregiver
                       Policy. The following family members cannot be a paid caregiver
                       for waiver services:

                   a. The spouse of a Medicaid participant (including married but separated);

                   b. A parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

                   c. A stepparent of a minor Medicaid participant;

                   d. A foster parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

                   e. Any other legally responsible adult or legal guardian of a Medicaid
                      participant.

                       All other qualified family members can be reimbursed for their provision of
                       nursing services.

                       For Children’s Private Duty Nursing only: qualified family members
                       can be reimbursed for services.

      E.        Conduct of Service
                The provider must maintain documentation showing that it has complied
                with the requirements of this section. An individual participant record must
                be maintained.

           1.          The provider must obtain the Plan of Service/Authorization from
                       the SCDHHS/SCDDSN prior to the provision of services. The
                       authorization must designate the amount, frequency, and duration
                       of service for participants in accordance with the participant's Plan
                       of Service. This documentation must be maintained in the
                       participant's file.

           2.          Prior to the initiation of nursing services, the provider must
                       conduct an assessment and develop a plan of care. This must be
                       done by a RN. If services are to be provided by an LPN, the Plan
                       of Care must be developed by the RN supervisor. The provider

                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                      Nursing Services

                  must update the plan of care at least every 90 days based on the
                  updated physician, nurse practitioner, or physician’s assistant
                  orders. The provider must maintain the initial and subsequent care
                  plans in the participant’s record. If applicable, recommendations to
                  change the authorized hours from the initial authorization may be
                  sent to SCDHHS/SCDDSN. Supervisory visits must be
                  documented on the Private Duty Nursing Supervisory Form and
                  submitted to SCDHHS as requested, at least quarterly.

                  For SCDHHS Participants: This visit must be recorded in the
                  Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System.

               a. Give the participant written information regarding advanced directives; the
                  participant is required to sign and date a statement that they have
                  received this information; the nurse supervisor is also required to sign and
                  date the statement.

               b. Inform participants of their right to complain about the quality of nursing
                  services provided; the participant is required to sign and date a statement
                  that they have received this information; the nurse supervisor is also
                  required to sign and date the statement. The complaint information must
                  contain at a minimum, the name of the person(s) to whom the complaint
                  must be made, that persons’ telephone number(s) and address(es). The
                  first point of contact must be a person employed by the provider. The
                  second point of contact must be any related licensing agency (DPH, LLR,
                  etc.).

         3.       If there is a break in service which lasts more than sixty (60) days,
                  the supervisor is required to conduct a new initial visit and
                  subsequent visits as indicated above.

         4.       The provider is responsible for procuring the direct care skilled
                  nursing orders from the physician, nurse practitioner, or
                  physician’s assistant prior to the start of services. The orders must
                  specify the skilled needs of the participant and include the
                  medication administration record (MAR). The provider must
                  communicate with the participant’s prescriber to maintain current
                  physician, nurse practitioner, or physician’s assistant orders. The
                  prescriber’s orders must be updated no less than every ninety (90)
                  days. Participant records must be maintained by the provider and
                  made available to the nurse providing care.

         5.       Nursing services must begin on the date agreed upon by the Case
                  Manager, provider, and participant indicated on the authorization.
                  Service Provision Forms must be dated with a start date of
                  Sunday. Services must begin the first week of authorization based
                  on participant’s requested schedule. Payment will not be made for
                  nursing services provided prior to the authorized start date.

         6.       The provider must notify SCDHHS/SCDDSN within two (2)
                  working days of the following participant changes:


                                South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Manual                                                             July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                          Nursing Services

               a. Participant's condition has changed, and the Plan of Service no longer
                  meets the participant's needs, or the participant no longer needs nursing
                  services;

               b. Participant is institutionalized, dies or moves out of the service area;

               c. Participant no longer wishes to receive the nursing services; or

               d. Knowledge of the participant's Medicaid ineligibility or potential ineligibility

               e. Report of abuse, neglect, or exploitation has been made to proper
                  authorities.

         7.        The provider must maintain a record keeping system which
                   documents:

               a. The delivery of services in accordance with the SCDHHS Service Plan.
                  The provider must maintain daily notes including Medication
                  Administration Record (MAR) that reflect the nursing services provided to
                  the participants. The provider shall not ask the participant/responsible
                  party to sign any nursing notes. Daily nursing notes must be signed and
                  dated by the nurse who provided the services with their original signature.
                  The nurse’s note must be reviewed, signed, with original signature (rubber
                  signature stamps are not acceptable), and dated every two weeks by the
                  supervisor. Nursing notes must be filed in the participant’s record within
                  thirty (30) days of service delivery

               b. Whenever two (2) consecutive attempted or missed visits occur, the local
                  SCDHHS/SCDDSN office must be notified. An attempted visit is when the
                  nurse arrives at the home and is unable to provide the assigned tasks
                  because the participant is not at home or refuses services. A missed visit
                  is when the provider is unable to provide the authorized service. These
                  instances must be documented in the participant’s record. In addition, the
                  provider must maintain documentation of the use of the backup plan in
                  the participant’s file

               c. All active participant records must contain at least two (2) years of
                  documentation to include at minimum:

                        i.    Plan of Care CMS Form 485

                       ii.    authorizations,

                       iii.   Private Duty Nursing Supervisory Form,

                       iv.    Private Duty Monthly Summary Form,

                       v.     Right to Complain documentation,




                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
HCBS Provider Manual                                                            July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                         Nursing Services

                       vi.   Advance Directive documentation,

                      vii.   physician, nurse practitioner, or physician’s assistant orders,

                     viii.   nurse assessments,

                       ix.   Medication Administration Records and

                       x.    daily nursing notes.

                     Per Medicaid policy, all records must be retained for a period of at least
                     five (5) years. Records must be made available to SCDHHS/SCDDSN
                     upon request

                  d. A summary of the services provided must be sent to SCDHHS/SCDDSN
                     monthly. This summary must be documented on Private Duty Monthly
                     Summary Form.


      F.        Administrative Requirements
           1.        The provider must inform SCDHHS of the provider’s organizational
                     structure, including the provider personnel with authority and
                     responsibility for employing qualified personnel, ensuring
                     adequate staff education, in-service training, and employee
                     evaluations. The provider shall notify SCDHHS within three (3)
                     working days in the event of a change in or the extended absence
                     of the personnel with the above-listed authority.

           2.        The provider must provide SCDHHS with a written document
                     showing the organization, administrative control and lines of
                     authority for the delegation of responsibility down to the hands-on
                     participant care level staff at contract implementation. The
                     document shall include an organizational chart including names of
                     those currently in the positions. Revisions or modifications to this
                     organizational document must be provided to SCDHHS. It is
                     recommended that this document be readily accessible to all staff.

           3.        Administrative and supervisory functions shall not be delegated to
                     another agency or organization.

           4.        The provider agency must acquire and maintain for the duration of
                     the contract liability insurance and worker’s compensation
                     insurance as provided in Article IX, Section D of the Contract. The
                     provider is required to list – SCDHHS as a Certificate Holder for
                     informational purposes only on all insurance policies using the
                     following address: Post Office Box 8206, Columbia, SC 29202-
                     8206.

                     Failure to maintain the required insurance will result in termination
                     of your contract with SCDHHS.


                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 8
HCBS Provider Manual                                                        July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                     Nursing Services

         5.         The provider must ensure that its office is staffed by qualified
                    personnel during the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Outside of
                    these hours; the provider agency must be available by telephone
                    during normal business hours, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
                    through Friday. Failure to maintain an open and staffed office as
                    indicated must result in sanctions as outlined in section F, last
                    paragraph. The provider must also have a number for
                    emergencies outside of normal business hours. Participant and
                    personnel records must be maintained at the address indicated in
                    the contract and must be made available, upon request, for review
                    by SCDHHS.

         6.         The provider must develop and maintain a policy and procedure
                    manual which describes how it must perform its activities in
                    accordance with the terms of the contract. The Policy and
                    Procedure Manual shall be available during office hours for the
                    guidance of the governing body and personnel must be available
                    to SCDHHS upon request.

         7.         The provider must have an effective written back-up plan in place
                    to ensure that the participant receives the nursing services as
                    authorized. Whenever the provider determines that services
                    cannot be provided as authorized, the Case Manager must be
                    notified by telephone for SCDDSN and/or Phoenix conversation
                    for LTSS participants immediately. Telephone calls must be
                    documented in the participant’s record. The provider must
                    maintain documentation of the use of the backup plan in the
                    participant’s file.

         8.         The provider shall ensure that key agency staff are accessible in
                    person or by phone during compliance review audits conducted by
                    SCDHHS and/or its agents. Providers are required to keep
                    documentation records, including medical records, in
                    chronological order.

         9.         The provider must comply with Article IX, Section Z of the
                    Contract regarding safety precautions. The provider must also
                    have an on-going infectious disease program to prevent the
                    spread of infectious diseases among its employees. At minimum,
                    the infectious disease program must include the following:

               e. Definition of infectious disease

               f.   How an infectious disease is spread

               g. How to provide services in a way that prevents the spread of an infectious
                  disease

      G.   Enhanced Nursing Services to High Risk/High Tech
      Children:


                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 9
HCBS Provider Manual                                                       July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                    Nursing Services

            The Department of Health and Human Services has established a
            separate classification and compensation plan for nurses who provide
            services to medically fragile children under the age of 21 who are
            ventilator dependent, respirator dependent, intubated and require
            parental feeding or any combination of these conditions.

            In addition to the staffing requirements outlined in Section D.1, the
            Registered Nurse (RN) or Licensed Practical Nurse (LPN) must have
            documented experience to care for these children that is over and above
            normal home care or school-based nurses.

            If the above requirements are met, the provider will be paid an enhanced
            rate for High Risk/High Tech Nursing services as indicated on the rate
            sheet included in the contract.




                               South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 10
