HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                 Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

      MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES

                                             FOR

 PERSONAL CARE, CHILDREN’S PERSONAL CARE,
HASCI AGENCY ATTENDANT CARE, HASCI AGENCY
  RESPITE, ID/RD AGENCY RESPITE, CS AGENCY
   RESPITE SERVICES, PCSC RESPITE and MCC
              UNSKILLED RESPITE
      A. Objectives
      The objectives of the Personal Care, Children’s Personal Care (CPCA), HASCI Agency
      Attendant Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency Respite,
      PCSC Respite, and MCC Respite services are to restore, maintain, and promote the
      health status and preserve a safe and sanitary home environment of Medicaid Home
      and Community- Based waiver participants through home support, medical monitoring,
      escort/transportation services, and assistance with activities of daily living and
      instrumental activities of daily living.

      B. Conditions of Participation
         1. Agencies desiring to be a provider of Personal Care, HASCI Agency
            Attendant Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, or CS
            Agency Respite services must have an owner and/or administrator that
            has demonstrated experience in In-Home personal care services or a
            similar service. The owner or administrator of the agency must have at
            least three (3) years of administrative experience in the health care field.
            If the owner is also the administrator, he or she is required to have at
            least three (3) years of administrative experience in the health care field.

         2. Pursuant to S.C. § Code 44-70-10 all providers of personal care services
            require a license to provide personal care services. Providers are
            required to renew their license annually. Providers who do not maintain
            their in- home care provider license must be terminated. Providers who
            are not licensed by the South Carolina Department of Public Health
            (SCDPH) will not be allowed to enroll as a Medicaid provider for these
            services. If the provider loses their SCDPH in-home care license for any
            reason, the provider must voluntarily terminate their contract with SCDHHS
            immediately. With voluntary termination, the provider will be able to
            recontract once required documentation is obtained and provided to
            SCDHHS. If there is an involuntary termination due to lack of licensing,
            the provider must wait 6 months prior to reapplying for the SCDHHS
            Contract.

         3. Provider agencies must be housed in an office that is in a commercially
            zoned or unzoned area.

         4. Agencies requesting prior approval must submit the following

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                 Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

            documents/evidence:

            a.   County/municipal zoning permit to operate a business

            b. Business licenses as required

            c. Evidence agency meets applicable county/municipal, mixed-use zoning
               guidelines

            d. Pictures exhibiting:

                   i.          Business entrance door

                  ii.          Office space devoted entirely for the business; space
                               must be enclosed and have a locking door

                  iii.         Outside business sign conforming to county/municipal
                               sign and zoning codes

         5. The provider must ensure that, when serving participants, its aide and
            supervisors display a photo identification badge identifying the provider
            and the employee.

         6. Agencies must utilize the automated systems mandated by the South
            Carolina Department of Health and Human Services (SCDHHS) to
            document and bill for the provision of services. Providers must log into
            the Phoenix Provider Portal (SCDHHS) or Therapy (SCDDSN) daily.

         7. Providers must accept or decline referrals from SCDHHS or South
            Carolina Department of Disabilities and Special Needs (SCDDSN) within
            two (2) working days. Failure to respond will result in the loss of the
            referral.

         8. The provider must verify the participant’s Medicaid eligibility when it
            accepts an authorization and monthly thereafter to ensure continued
            eligibility. Agencies can verify Medicaid eligibility for SCDHHS participants
            in the Phoenix Provider Portal on their dashboard or by utilizing the
            Medicaid Web Tool. Providers must also refer to the Administrative and
            Billing Manual for additional information on eligibility determination.

         9. Providers may use paperless filing systems. Electronic records must be
            made available upon request, and providers must have a reliable back-up
            system in the event their computer system shuts down. Electronic records
            must meet all scope requirements and requirements outlined in the
            Administrative and Billing Manual

         10. The provider must agree to use any competency evaluation provided by
             SCDHHS.

      C. Description of Services to be Provided
         1. For SCDHHS, the unit of service is one (1) hour of direct Personal Care,

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                           July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                   Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

            CPCA and PCSC Respite services provided in the participant's place of
            residence and/or natural environment. For SCDDSN, the unit of service is
            fifteen (15) minutes for Personal Care, HASCI Agency Attendant Care,
            HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency Respite

         2. Personal Care, CPCA, HASCI Agency Attendant Care, HASCI Agency
            Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency Respite, and PCSC Respite
            services may be provided in other locations when the participant’s record
            documents the need and when prior approved by the case manager/care
            coordinator (CM/CC). Services are not allowed when the participant is in
            an institutional setting, Adult Day Health Care (ADHC) and/or Pediatric
            Medical Day Care setting. The amount of time authorized does not
            include provider transportation time to and from the participant. Services
            provided without a current, valid authorization are not reimbursable.

         3. The number of units and services provided to each participant are
            dependent upon the individual participant's needs as set forth in the
            participant's Service Plan/Authorization. If it is determined that a
            participant requires more than one aide for lifting, transfers, etc., this must
            be prior approved by SCDHHS/ SCDDSN.

         4. When services are authorized for more than one SCDHHS/SCDDSN
            participant in the same home, the provider must document and deliver the
            total amount of hours authorized for each participant. For example, if both
            participants are authorized for two (2) hours of Personal Care per day; the
            aide must provide a total of four (4) hours per day in the home or natural
            environment.

         5. Under no circumstances will any type of skilled medical service be
            performed by an aide. HASCI Agency Attendants or HASCI Respite
            caregivers may provide skilled services as authorized by the Service
            Coordinator. All skilled needs for HASCI services are determined by RN
            delegation. All skilled needs for MCC services must be determined by a
            physician, nurse practitioner or physician’s assistant.

         6. Services to be provided include:

            a. Support for activities of daily living, e.g.,

                        •   eating
                        •   bathing (bed bath, bench shower, sink bath)
                        •   personal grooming including dressing
                        •   personal hygiene
                        •   providing skin care (applying lotion, oil, etc.)
                        •   meal planning and preparation
                        •   assisting participants in and out of bed

                        •   repositioning participants as necessary


                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                 Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

                        •   assisting with ambulation

                     • toileting and maintaining continence
            b. Home support, e.g.,

                            •   cleaning

                            •   laundry

                            •   shopping

                            •   home safety

                           • errands
            c. Monitoring of the participant’s condition such as but not limited to the
               type of monitoring that would be done by a family member such as
               monitoring temperature, checking pulse rate and observation of
               respiratory rate.

            d. Monitoring medication (for example, informing the participant that it is
               time to take medication as prescribed by his, or her, physician and as
               written directions on the box, or bottle, indicate). The aide cannot
               administer the medicine; however, this does not preclude the aide
               from handing the medicine container to the participant. HASCI Agency
               Attendants or HASCI Respite caregivers may give medication as
               authorized by the Service Coordinator. All skilled needs for HASCI
               services are determined by RN delegation.

            e. Escort services when necessary. Transportation may be provided
               when necessary and included in the participant’s Service
               Plan/Authorization. The provision of transportation is optional and will
               depend on the provider’s policy.

            f.   Strength and balance training.

            g. Limited assistance with financial matters such as, but not limited to,
               delivering payments to designated recipients on behalf of the
               participant. Receipts for payment must be returned to the participant.

            h. Assistance with communication which includes, but is not limited to,
               placing the phone within participant’s reach and physically assisting
               participant with use of the phone, and orientation to daily events.

      D. Staffing
         1. The provider must provide all the following staff members:

                        Note: Supervisory nurses may be provided through
                        subcontracting arrangements:

            a. A registered nurse(s) (RN) or licensed practical nurse(s) (LPN) who
               meets the following requirements:


                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                            July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                    Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

                  i.    Currently licensed by the S.C. Board of Nursing

                         ii.      Capable of evaluating the aide’s competency in terms
                                  of his or her ability to carry out assigned duties and
                                  his/her ability to relate to the participant

                        iii.      Able to assume responsibility for in-service training for
                                  aides by individual instruction, group meetings or
                                  workshops

                        iv.       The provider must verify nurse licensure at time of
                                  employment and must ensure that the license always
                                  remains active and in good standing during
                                  employment. The provider must maintain a copy of the
                                  current license verification in the employee’s personnel
                                  file. Nurse licensure can be verified at the State Board
                                  of nursing website:

                               https://verify.llronline.com/LicLookup/Nurse/Nurse.aspx?di
                               v=17

            b. Aides who meet the following minimum qualifications:

                  i.    Able to read, write, and communicate effectively with
                        participant and supervisor

                 ii.              Able to use the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV)
                                  System

                 iii.             Capable of assisting with the activities of daily living

                 iv.              Capable of following a care plan with minimal
                                  supervision.

                 v.               Have a valid driver’s license if transporting participants.
                                  The provider must ensure the employee’s license is
                                  valid while transporting any participants by verifying the
                                  official highway department driving record of the
                                  employed individual initially and every two (2) years
                                  during employment. Copies of the initial and
                                  subsequent driving records must be maintained in the
                                  employee’s personnel file.

                 vi.              Are at least 18 years of age

                vii.              Have passed competency testing or successfully
                                  completed a competency training and evaluation
                                  program performed by a RN or LPN prior to providing
                                  services to Home and Community-Based waiver
                                  participants. The competency evaluation must contain
                                  all elements of the PC services in the Description of
                                  Services listed above. The competency training must

                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                 July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services         Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

                        also include training on the following required training
                        topics:


                                   •   Confidentiality, accountability and
                                       prevention of abuse and neglect

                                   •   Fire safety/disaster preparedness related
                                       to the specific location of services

                                   •   First   aid    for   emergencies,
                                       monitoring medications, and basic
                                       recognition of medical problems

                                   •   Documentation and record keeping

                                   •   Ethics and interpersonal relationships

                                   •   Orientation to traumatic brain
                                       injury, spinal cord injury,
                                       dementia,      and      similar
                                       disability

                                   •   Training in lifting and transfers


                        If an LPN performs the competency evaluation, the LPN
                        must be supervised by a RN and report all competency
                        evaluation results to the RN supervisor. The LPN and
                        the supervising RN, as a confirmation of the delegation
                        of this responsibility, must sign and date the form. All
                        signatures must be original, signature stamps are not
                        acceptable.

                        Proof of the competency evaluation must be recorded
                        and filed in the personnel record prior to the aide
                        providing care to waiver participants. Community
                        Options has developed a form called Competency
                        Documentation Form which must be used to document
                        the competency evaluation results.

                        All aides, including those who are Certified Nursing
                        Assistants (CNA), are required to complete the
                        competency testing or training and evaluation outlined
                        above.

                viii.   Have a minimum of ten (10) hours of relevant in-
                        service training per calendar year to include mandatory
                        annual training topics. The annual 10-hour requirement
                        will be pro-rated based on the month of hire for the first
                        calendar year of employment. Training must be
                        conducted under the supervision of the nurse

                          South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Manual                                                        July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

                              supervisor. Documentation shall include topic, name
                              and title of trainer, training objectives, outline of
                              content, length of training, list of trainees, and location.
                              This documentation must be maintained in an annual
                              in-service manual for all employees. In addition, each
                              staff member’s personnel file must contain a summary
                              of their in-service training for the year.

                              Providers are to maintain a summary including the date
                              of the training, the subject or title of the training,
                              signature and title of the trainer, signature of employee,
                              and the total number of in- service hours earned.
                              SCDHHS has developed a form called In-Service
                              Documentation Form which must be used to document
                              in-service training. Topics for specific in-service training
                              may be mandated by SCDHHS. In-service training may
                              be furnished by the nurse supervisor while the aide is
                              furnishing care to the participant. Additional training
                              may be provided as deemed necessary by the
                              Provider. All instructor-led and self-study training
                              programs, not on the prior approved list must be
                              approved for content and credit hours by SCDHHS
                              prior to being offered. Self-study training hours may
                              not exceed six (6) of the ten (10) in-service annual
                              training hours. The Provider shall submit proposed
                              programs not on the prior approved list to the SCDHHS
                              Community Options Central Office at least forty-five
                              (45) days prior to the planned implementation. All
                              approved training topics are at the SCDHHS agency
                              website:

                              Approved In-Service Training Topics

         2. Agency staff may be related to participants served by the agency within
            limits allowed by the South Carolina Family Caregiver Policy. The
            following family members cannot be a paid caregiver:

            a. The spouse of a Medicaid participant (including married but
               separated);

            b. A parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

            c. A stepparent of a minor Medicaid participant;

            d. A foster parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

            e. Any other legally responsible adult or legal guardian of a Medicaid
               participant


                Family members who are primary caregivers will not be reimbursed for
                HASCI Attendant Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency

                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                 Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

                 Respite, CS Agency Respite, and PCSC Respite, and MCC Respite.
                 All other qualified family members can be reimbursed for their
                 provision of Personal Care, CPCA, HASCI Attendant Care, HASCI
                 Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency Respite, PCSC
                 Respite, and MCC Respite.


         3. PPD Tuberculin Test

         Please refer to the Department of Public Health (DPH) website for PPD
         Tuberculin test requirements.

         https://scdhec.gov/sites/default/files/media/document/R.61-122.pdf

         For additional information, providers must contact the Tuberculosis Control
         Division, Department of Public Health, 1751 Calhoun Street, Columbia, SC
         29201, phone (803) 898-0558.

         4. Individual records must be maintained that document that each staff
            member has met all staffing requirements. Required documentation must
            be filed in the personnel file within fifteen (15) days of employment or of
            receipt. Employee records must contain at minimum

            a. the employee application/resume,

            b. background checks,

            c. CNA registry check,

            d. OIG report,

            e. SCDHHS competency evaluation documentation form,

            f.   and in-service training documentation for the employee.

            Other documents must be maintained in the file as applicable: PPD
            testing, driver’s license and driving record, and nurse’s license validation.

         5. A State Law Enforcement Division (SLED) criminal background check is
            required for all employees prior to hire and at least every two years
            thereafter to include employees who will provide direct care to
            SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants and all administrative/office employees
            (office employees required to have SLED background checks include:
            administrator, office manager, nurse supervisor, and persons named on
            organizational chart in management positions). All SLED criminal
            background checks must include all data for the individual with no less
            than a ten (10) year timeframe being searched. The SLED criminal
            background check must include statewide data. The statewide data must
            include South Carolina and any other state or states the worker has
            resided in within the prior (10) ten years. Potential employees with felony
            convictions within the last ten (10) years cannot provide services to
            SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants or work in an administrative/office

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 8
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                 Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

             position. Potential employees with non-violent felonies dating back ten
             (10) or more years can provide services to SCDHHS/SCDDSN
             participants under the following circumstances:

                       •   Participant/responsible party must be notified of the aide’s
                           SLED criminal background, i.e., felony conviction, and year
                           of conviction;
                       •   The provider must obtain a written statement, signed by the
                           participant/responsible party acknowledging awareness of
                           the aide’s SLED criminal background and agreement to have
                           the aide provide care; this statement must be placed in the
                           participant record.
         Potential administrative/office employees with non-violent felony convictions
         dating back ten (10) or more years can work in the agency at the provider’s
         discretion.

         Hiring employees with misdemeanor convictions will be at the provider’s
         discretion. Employees hired prior to July 1, 2007, and continuously employed
         since then will not be required to have a SLED criminal background check.

         6. The provider must check the CNA registry for all staff prior to hire then at
            least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search results page must
            be maintained in each employee’s personnel file. Anyone on the CNA
            Registry with a revoked license is not allowed to provide services to
            waiver participants or participate in any Medicaid funded programs. The
            website addresses are listed below:

         CNA Registry: https://cna365.examroom.ai/registry/?StateCode=SC

         7. The provider must check the OIG exclusions lists for all staff prior to hire
            then at least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search results page
            must be maintained in each employee’s personnel file. Anyone on the
            OIG Registry is not allowed to provide services to waiver participants or
            participate in any Medicaid funded programs. The website addresses are
            listed below:

         OIG Exclusions List: https://exclusions.oig.hhs.gov/

      E. Conduct of Service
      The provider must maintain documentation showing that it has complied with the
      requirements of this section.

         1. The provider must obtain a Service Provision Form or Authorization for
            Personal Care, CPCA, HASCI Attendant Care, HASCI Agency Respite,
            ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency Respite, PCSC Respite, or MCC
            Respite from the CM or CC. The authorization will designate the amount,
            frequency, and duration of service for participants in accordance with the
            participant's Service Plan/Authorization. The provider will receive new
            authorizations only when there is a change to the authorized service
            amount, frequency, or duration. The current and past Service

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 9
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                 Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

            Authorizations must be printed and placed in the participant’s record.
            Services must not begin prior to the authorized start date.

         2. For SCHHS participants, the provider must obtain an updated SCDHHS
            Service Plan from the case manager prior to the start of services.
            SCDHHS Service plans are updated in Phoenix annually and available on
            the provider’s dashboard. The provider must maintain the current and
            annual service plans in the participant’s record. The provider must adhere
            to those duties which are specified in the SCDHHS Service Plan in
            developing the provider task list. This provider task list must be developed
            by an RN or LPN Supervisor. Provider task lists for CPCA services must
            be completed by an RN Supervisor as CPCA services must be supervised
            by an RN. If additional tasks are identified that would be beneficial for the
            participant that are not outlined in the SCDHHS Service Plan, the provider
            must contact CM to discuss the possibility of having these duties included
            in the SCDHHS Service Plan. Please note that for DDSN participants, no
            Service Plan will be provided.

         3. As part of the conduct of service, Personal Care, HASCI Agency
            Attendant Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS
            Agency Respite, and PCSC Respite services must be provided under the
            supervision of a RN or LPN who meets the requirements as stated in this
            Scope and who will:

            a. Visit the participant’s home prior to the start of Personal Care, CPCA
               HASCI Agency Attendant Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD
               Agency Respite, CS Agency Respite, and PCSC Respite services.
               This visit by the provider’s nurse must be recorded in the Electronic
               Visit Verification (EVV) System from the participant’s home at the time
               of the visit (for SCDHHS participants) and documented in the record.
               If the participant has already been receiving another similar service
               a new initial visit is required prior to the start date of personal care
               services. For SCDDSN participants, the provider must adhere to
               those duties which are specified in the service plan authorization in
               developing the provider task list. This provider task list must be
               developed by a RN or LPN. If there are additional tasks not outlined in
               the Service Authorization for SCDDSN participants, the provider must
               contact the CC to discuss the possibility of adding the additional duties
               to the service authorization. The purpose of this visit is to:


                   i.    Develop the list of required tasks to be performed by the aide
                         based on the needs outlined on the Service
                         Plan/Authorization for the participant. (This list must be
                         developed prior to the provision of PCS/CPCA/HASCI Agency
                         Attendant Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency
                         Respite, CS Respite services, PCSC Respite, and MCCW
                         Respite.) Documentation must be maintained in the
                         participant’s record

                  ii.   Give the participant written information regarding advanced


                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 10
HCBS Provider Manual                                                           July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                   Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

                         directives; the participant is required to sign and date a
                         statement that they have received this information; the nurse
                         supervisor is also required to sign and date the statement.

                  iii.   Inform participants of their right to complain about the quality of
                         PCS/CPCA/HASCI Attendant Care, HASCI Respite, ID/RD
                         Respite, and CS Respite services provided; the participant is
                         required to sign and date a statement that they have received
                         this information; the nurse supervisor is also required to sign and
                         date the statement. The complaint information must contain at a
                         minimum, the name of the person(s) to whom the complaint
                         must be made, that persons’ telephone number(s) and
                         address(es). The first point of contact must be a person
                         employed by the provider. The second point of contact must be
                         any related licensing agency (DPH, LLR, etc.)

                  iv.    The nurse supervisor must give participants information about
                         how to register a complaint. Complaints against aides must be
                         investigated by the provider and appropriate action taken.
                         Documentation must be maintained in the participant and aide’s
                         file.

            b. Nurse supervisors and/or aides may not discuss services authorized by
               SCDHHS or SCDDSN with the participant. If participants of any
               waiver ask about either the level of service they are receiving or the
               different services offered in one of the waivers the nurse supervisor
               and/or aide must refer that participant back to their case manager for
               additional information.

            c. Be accessible by phone during any hours services are provided under
               this contract. If the nurse supervisor position becomes vacant,
               SCDHHS must be notified no later than the next business day by
               emailing provider-distribution@scdhhs.gov.

            d. Provide and document supervision of, training for, and evaluation of
               aides.

            e. Make a supervisory visit to the participant’s place of residence within
               thirty (30) days after the PCS/CPCA/HASCI Attendant Care service is
               initiated.

            f.   After the thirty (30) day supervisory visit, make a supervisory visit to
                 the participant’s place of residence at least once every four (4)
                 months for each participant. Four (4) month supervisory visits must be
                 conducted by the end of the fourth month. The aide must be present
                 during at least one (1) of the supervisory visits during each twelve (12)
                 month period. For SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants, supervisory visits,
                 including the initial visit, must be documented in the participant record
                 and recorded in the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System, for
                 SCDHHS only, from the participant’s home at the time of the visit. In
                 the event the participant is inaccessible during the time the
                 supervisory visit would have normally been made, the visit must be

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 11
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                 Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

                completed within five (5) working days of the resumption of Personal
                Care/HASCI Attendant Care services. The supervisor's report of the
                on-site visits must include, at a minimum:

                   i.    Documentation that services are being delivered consistent
                         with the Service Plan/Authorization.

                  ii.           Documentation that the participant's needs are being
                                met.

                  iii.          Reference to any complaints which the participant
                                or family member/responsible party has lodged.

                  iv.           A brief statement regarding any changes in the
                                participant's service needs; and,

                  v.            Supervisor’s original signature and date. Signature
                                stamps are not acceptable.

            g. Assist aides as necessary as they provide individual personal care
               services as outlined by the Service Plan Authorization. Any
               supervision given must be documented in the individual participant's
               record.

         4. Documentation of all supervisory visits must be filed in the participant’s
            record within thirty (30) days of the date of visit.

         5. Supervisory visits must be conducted as necessary if there are
            indications of substandard performance by the aide.

         6. If there is a break in service which lasts more than sixty (60) days, the
            supervisor must complete a new initial visit when services are resumed. If
            the participant’s condition changes enough to warrant a new service plan,
            the supervisor must update the task sheet to reflect the new duties.

         7. The provider must maintain an individual participant record which
            documents the following:

            a. The provider must initiate Personal Care, CPCA, HASCI Attendant
               Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency
               Respite, PCSC Respite, and MCC Respite services on the date
               agreed upon by the CM, provider, and participant indicated on the
               Medicaid authorization. Services must not be provided prior to the
               authorized start date and must be provided according to the schedule
               as indicated on the Service Plan/Authorization.

                For CPCA, Service Provision Forms must be dated with a start date of
                Sunday. Services must begin the first week of authorization based on
                participant’s requested schedule.

            b. If the provider identifies Personal Care, CPCA, HASCI Attendant
               Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency


                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 12
HCBS Provider Manual                                                          July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                  Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

               Respite, PCSC Respite, and MCC Respite service duties that would
               be beneficial to the participant's care but are not specified in the
               SCDHHS Service plan for SCDHHS participants or Service
               Authorization for SCDDSN participants, the provider must contact the
               CM or CC to discuss the possibility of having these duties included in
               the Service Plan/Authorization. The CM or CC will make the decision
               as to whether the Service Plan/Authorization should be amended to
               include the additional service duty.

            c. For SCDHHS participants, no skilled services may be performed by
               the aide. For SCDDSN HASCI participants, skilled services may be
               performed by an aide only as allowed by the Nurse Practice Act. For
               HASCI participants, skilled service must be ordered by a licensed
               physician and authorized by the Case Manager. The aide must be
               trained by an RN and the RN must delegate skilled care to the aide.
               Documentation of the training and delegation must be maintained in
               both the participant’s file and the aide’s personnel file. The physician’s
               order, authorization and RN training/delegation must be obtained prior
               to the aide rendering the service.

            d. The provider must notify the CM or CC within two (2) working days of the
               following:

                  i.    Participant's condition has changed, and the Service Plan no
                        longer meets participant's needs or the participant no longer
                        appears to need PCS/CPCA/HASCI Attendant Care, HASCI
                        Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency Respite,
                        PCSC Respite, and MCCW Respite services.

                  ii.   Participant is institutionalized, dies or moves out of the service
                        area.

                 iii.   Participant no longer wishes to receive PCS/CPCA/HASCI
                        Attendant Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency
                        Respite, CS Agency Respite, PCSC Respite, and MCC
                        Respite services.

                 iv.    Knowledge of the participant's Medicaid ineligibility or potential
                        ineligibility.

                 v.     Report regarding abuse, neglect, or exploitation has been
                        made to the appropriate authorities.


            e. The provider must maintain a record keeping system which
               documents:

                  i.    The delivery of services in accordance with the SCDHHS
                        Service Plan. The provider shall not ask the
                        participant/responsible party to sign any log or task sheet. The
                        task sheet must be reviewed, signed, with original signature
                        (signature stamps are not acceptable), and dated every two

                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 13
HCBS Provider Manual                                                          July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                  Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

                         weeks by the supervisor. Task sheets must be filed in the
                         participant’s record within 30 days of service delivery.

                   ii.   Services provided by the personal care aide must also be
                         documented in the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System
                         at check out.

                  iii.   NOTE: For SCDHHS participants, the Participant Activity Task
                         Sheet report can be accessed in Phoenix Provider Portal may
                         be utilized as the documentation of the delivery of services if
                         the previously stated criteria is met. However, if a resolution is
                         submitted for a date of service, a task sheet listing services
                         provided must be maintained in the participant’s file.

                  iv.    Task sheets/Daily logs can include multiple services on the
                         same sheet if the services can be easily identified, and tasks
                         performed can be distinguished. For example, if a participant
                         receives PCS and Companion services, both can be
                         documented on the same sheet if each service can be easily
                         identified.

                  v.     All active participant records must contain at least two (2)
                         years of documentation to include task sheets, service plans,
                         supervisory visit documentation, any complaints, etc. Per
                         Medicaid policy all records must be retained for at least five (5)
                         years. Active records must contain all service authorizations,
                         SCDHHS Service Plans (for SCDHHS participants), Right to
                         Complain documentation, Advanced Directives
                         documentation, Task Sheets and Supervisory Visit
                         Documentation.

            f.   For SCDHHS participants: For all instances in which a participant
                 did not receive an authorized daily service, providers must indicate on
                 the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System website the reason why
                 the service was not delivered. The provider must do this both when
                 the provider was unable to complete the visit and when the participant
                 was not available to receive the visit. For each week in which there
                 are missed visits, the provider must indicate the reason on the
                 website by the close of business the following week. A missed visit
                 report is not required for CPCA/SCDDSN/HASCI/IDRD/CS/PCSC
                 participants.

            g. Whenever two (2) consecutive attempted or missed visits occur, the
               local SCDHHS/SCDDSN office must be notified. An attempted visit is
               when the aide arrives at the home and is unable to provide the
               assigned tasks because the participant is not at home or refuses
               services. A missed visit is when the provider is unable to provide the
               authorized service. These instances must be documented in the
               participant’s record as well as the Phoenix Provider Portal for
               SCDHHS participants.

         8. Providers must adhere to all Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 14
HCBS Provider Manual                                                           July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                   Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

             and Phoenix policies and procedures as indicated in the Phoenix EVV
             Provider User Guidelines, which can be obtained from the Phoenix
             Provider portal (https://providers.phoenix.scdhhs.gov/) in the Help
             section.

      F. Children’s Personal Care Requirements
      The requirements listed in this section are in addition to the requirements listed in this
      scope for PCS/CPCA services. Children’s PC services are reimbursable when the
      following conditions are met:

         1. Child is under age 21

         2. Provided in the participant’s place of residence/and or in the community

         3. Authorized by SCDHHS/SCDDSN

      The CM must determine the need for personal care services and develop a service plan
      that outlines the child’s needs. This service plan will only be updated as needed.

      Children’s Personal Care services must be supervised by a Registered Nurse (RN).


      G. Administrative Requirements
         1. The provider must inform SCDHHS of the provider’s organizational
            structure including the Provider personnel with authority and responsibility
            for employing qualified personnel, ensuring adequate staff education, in-
            service training and employee evaluations. The provider agency shall
            notify SCDHHS within three (3) working days in the event of a change in
            the agency administrator, address, phone number or an extended
            absence of the agency administrator.

         2. The provider must provide SCDHHS with a written document showing the
            organization, administrative control and lines of authority for the
            delegation of responsibility down to the hands-on participant care level
            staff at contract implementation. The document must include an
            organizational chart including names of those currently in the positions.
            Revisions or modifications to this organizational document must be
            provided to SCDHHS. It is recommended that this document be readily
            accessible to all staff.

         3. Administrative and supervisory functions shall not be delegated to
            another agency or organization.

         4. The provider agency shall acquire and maintain for the duration of the
            contract liability insurance and worker’s compensation insurance as
            provided in Article IX, Section D of the Contract. The provider is required
            to list SCDHHS as a Certificate Holder for informational purposes only on
            all insurance policies using the following address: Post Office Box 8206,
            Columbia, SC 29202-8206.


                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 15
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                 Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

            Failure to maintain the required insurance will result in termination of your
            contract with SCDHHS

         5. The provider must develop and maintain a Policy and Procedure Manual
            that describes how activities will be performed in accordance with the
            terms of the requirements of the contract. The Policy and Procedure
            Manual shall be available during office hours for the guidance of the
            governing body and personnel and must be made available to SCDHHS
            upon request.

         6. The provider must comply with Article IX, Section Z of the Contract
            regarding safety precautions. The provider must also have an on-going
            infectious disease program to prevent the spread of infectious diseases
            among its employees. At minimum, the infectious disease program must
            include the following

            a. Definition of infectious disease

            b. How an infectious disease is spread

            c. How to provide services in a way that prevents the spread of an
               infectious disease

         7. The provider shall ensure that key agency staff are accessible in person
            or by phone during compliance review audits conducted by SCDHHS
            and/or its agents. Providers are required to keep documentation records,
            including medical records, in chronological order.

         8. The provider must ensure that its office is open and staffed by qualified
            personnel during the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through
            Friday. Outside of these hours, the Provider agency must be available by
            telephone during normal business hours, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
            through Friday. Failure to maintain an open and staffed office as
            indicated will result in sanctions as outlined in section G, last paragraph.
            The provider must also have a number for emergencies outside of normal
            business hours. Participant and personnel records must be maintained at
            the address indicated in the contract and must be made available, upon
            request, for review by SCDHHS.

         9. The provider must have an effective written back-up plan in place to ensure
            that the participant receives the PCS/CPCA, CPCA, HASCI Attendant
            Care, HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency
            Respite, PCSC Respite, and MCCW Respite services as authorized.
            Whenever the provider determines that services cannot be provided as
            authorized, the Case Manager must be notified by telephone for
            SCDDSN or Phoenix conversation for SCDHHS participants immediately.
            Telephone calls must be documented in the participant’s record. The
            provider must maintain documentation of the use of the backup plan in the
            participant’s file.

         10. The provider shall update holidays in Phoenix; the provider is not required
             to furnish services on those days. PCS/CPCA/HASCI Attendant Care,

                                South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 16
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                 Personal Care Services, CPCA, HASCI Attendant, Respite

            HASCI Agency Respite, ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency Respite,
            PCSC Respite, and MCCW Respite provider agency must not be closed
            for more than two (2) consecutive days at a time, except when a holiday
            falls in conjunction with a weekend. If a holiday falls in conjunction with a
            weekend, a PCS/CPCA/HASCI Attendant Care, HASCI Agency Respite,
            ID/RD Agency Respite, CS Agency Respite, PCSC Respite, and MCCW
            Respite provider agency may be closed for not more than four (4)
            consecutive days.




                                South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 17
