HCBS Provider Manual                                                             July 1, 2024
Standards of Services                                                           Pest Control


                           Pest Control Standards
      A.     Condition of Participation:
         All providers must verify participant’s Medicaid eligibility upon acceptance of an
         authorization for pest control and any time services are rendered thereafter to
         ensure continued eligibility. Eligibility verification can be done via phone by
         contacting 1-888-809-3040.

         Agencies must utilize the automated systems mandated by LTSS to document
         and bill for the provision of services.

         Providers must accept or decline referrals from LTSS or SCDDSN within two (2)
         working days. Failure to respond must result in the loss of the referral.

      B.     Conduct of Service:
         The Provider must obtain an authorization for pest control services from LTSS.
         The authorization must designate the amount, frequency and duration of service
         for participants. Pest control authorizations are for a maximum of once every
         other month. The Provider must receive new authorizations only when there is a
         change to the authorized service amount, frequency or duration.

         All instructions on the authorization for service must be followed in order to be
         reimbursed for the pest control service.

         Pest control services must be completed by the provider within 14 days of
         acceptance of the LTSS authorization for service.

         Pest Control treatments need to include both in-home and exterior treatment. All
         providers must go into the participants’ home to inspect and treat the residence
         and call in the service to Care Call. If a participant is not at the residence at the
         time of the treatment the provider must need to reschedule for a time when the
         participant must be present in the home.

         Providers can only utilize a cell phone to call in claims if the participant doesn’t
         have a home phone. If for any reason a provider can’t make the call for pest
         control on the day of the treatment, then the claim must be submitted via the
         Provider Portal website. Providers who are not routinely calling in claims for this
         service through the Care Call phone system must be terminated from South
         Carolina Medicaid.

         Pest control service does not cover the removal of snakes, termites, or rodents




                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
