HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                   Residential Personal Care

     MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES

                                             FOR

                  RESIDENTIAL PERSONAL CARE

      A.      Objectives
           The objective of the Residential Personal Care (RPCPC) services is to restore,
           maintain, and promote the health status of Medicaid Home and Community Based
           waiver participants who choose to transition from their homes into the residential
           facilities or for individuals who wish to remain in the community residential care
           facilities and meet the intermediate nursing home level of care.

      B.      Conditions of Participation
           1. The Provider of RPCPC services in a CRCF must meet all SCDHEC
              standards for licensure and must comply with all requirements of this
              Scope of Services.

           2. The Provider must have demonstrated experience in personal care
              services. The Provider’s administrator must have at least three (3) years
              of administrative experience in the health care field.

           3. The Provider shall accept or decline referrals from Community Long
              Term Care (CLTCLTSS) within two (2) working days. Failure to respond
              within this timeframe will result in the loss of the referral.

           4. The Provider will be responsible for verifying the Participant’s Medicaid
              eligibility when it has accepted a referral and monthly thereafter to
              ensure continued eligibility. The Provider shall refer to the OSS Provider
              Manual for instructions on how to verify Medicaid eligibility.

           5. The Provider shall not be at risk of classification as a Resident Case Mix.
              The OSCAP facility that is licensed for more than sixteen (16) beds or is
              part of a larger entity that exceeds sixteen (16) beds shall not admit or
              maintain a census of more than 45% of residents whose current need
              for placement as determined by SCDHHS is due to a mental illness.
              The policies and procedures outlining the process for determining the
              CRCF’s risk for resident case mix are in the OSS Provider Manual.

           6. The Provider shall utilize the automated systems mandated by
              SCDHHS CLTCLTSS Division to document and bill for the provision of
              services.

           7. The Provider may use paperless filing systems. When using electronic
              filing systems any documentation requiring signatures must be signed
              prior to scanning. Electronic records must be made available upon
              request, and providers must have a reliable back-up system in the event
              their computer system shuts down.

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                   July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                       Residential Personal Care

           8. The Provider shall submit upon execution of the Contract and as
              requested by SCDHHS thereafter evidence of working capital that will
              show that the Provider has the capability to operate for a minimum of
              sixty (60) days in the event Medicaid reimbursement is delayed or
              withheld for any reason. This evidence shall be a certified written
              statement from an officer of a financial institution or a certified
              accountant.

              The minimum working capital levels are:

                  •   4-10 Beds – $2,500

                  •   11-25 Beds – $5,000

                  •   26 and above – $10,000

      C.      Description of Services to be provided
           1. The Provider shall ensure that the facility meet specific basic
              requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, as outlined in the
              OSS Provider Manual (as amended).

           2. The unit of service will be a patient day which is defined as a twenty-four
              (24) hour period, including the day of admission and excluding the day
              of discharge. The per diem rate will include all those items and supplies
              associated with patient care, except prescribed drugs and personal
              items. These items cannot be billed to Medicaid.

           3. The number of units and services provided to each Participant are
              dependent upon the individual Participant's needs as set forth in the
              Participant's Service Plan.

           4. Under no circumstances will any type of skilled medical service be
              performed in a CRCF.

           5. Services to be provided in a CRCF include:

              a. Support for activities of daily living which include:

                         •   Eating

                         •   Bathing (bed bath, bench shower, sink bath)

                         •   Personal grooming including dressing

                         •   Personal hygiene

                         •   Provide necessary skin care

                         •   Assisting participants in and out of bed

                         •   Repositioning participants as necessary

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                  Residential Personal Care

                        •   Assisting with ambulation

                        •   Toileting and maintaining continence

              b. Monitoring of the Participant’s condition, e.g., the type of monitoring that
                 would be done by a family member such as monitoring temperature,
                 checking pulse rate, observation of respiratory rate, and blood pressure.

      D.      Staffing
           1. The Provider shall maintain staffing in accordance with the OSS
              Provider Manual.

           2. The Provider’s staff may have a familiar relationship to a participant
              served by the Provider within limits allowed by the South Carolina Family
              Caregiver Policy. The following family members cannot be a paid
              caregiver:

              a. The spouse of a Medicaid participant (including married but separated);

              b. A parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

              c. A stepparent of a minor Medicaid participant;

              d. A foster parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

              e. Any other legally responsible guardian of a Medicaid participant.

           3. PPD Tuberculin Test

              Please refer to the Department of Health and Environmental Control
              (DHEC) website for PPD Tuberculin test requirements.

              For additional information, providers should contact the Tuberculosis
              Control Division, Department of Health and Environmental Control,
              1751 Calhoun Street, Columbia, SC 29201, phone (803) 898-0558.

           4. Individual records must be maintained that document that each staff
              member has met all staffing requirements.

           5. A SLED criminal background check is required for all employees, prior
              to hire and at least every 2 years thereafter, to include employees who
              will provide direct care to SCDHHS participants and all
              administrative/office employees (office employees required to have
              SLED background checks include: administrator, office manager, nurse
              supervisor, and persons named on organizational chart in management
              positions). All SLED criminal background checks must include all data
              for the individual with no limit on the timeframe being searched. SLED
              criminal background checks that cover a specific period such as seven-
              or ten-year searches are not acceptable. The SLED criminal
              background check must include statewide (South Carolina) data.
              Potential employees with felony convictions within the last ten (10)

                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                   Residential Personal Care

              years cannot provide services to SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants or
              work in an administrative/office position. Potential employees with non-
              violent felonies dating back ten (10) or more years can provide services
              to SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants under the following circumstances:

              a. Participant/responsible party must be notified of the aide’s SLED criminal
                 background, i.e., felony conviction, and year of conviction;

              b. The provider must obtain a written statement, signed by the
                 participant/responsible party acknowledging awareness of the aide’s SLED
                 criminal background and agreement to have the aide provide care; this
                 statement must be placed in the participant record.

              Potential administrative/office employees with non-violent felony
              convictions dating back ten (10) or more years can work in the agency
              at the provider’s discretion.

              Hiring employees with misdemeanor convictions will be at the provider’s
              discretion. Employees hired prior to July 1, 2007, and continuously
              employed since then will not be required to have a SLED criminal
              background check.

           6. The provider must check the CNA registry for all staff prior to hire then
              at least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search results page
              must be maintained in each employee’s personnel file. Anyone on the
              CNA Registry with a revoked license is not allowed to provide services
              to waiver participants or participate in any Medicaid funded programs.
              The website addresses are listed below:

                      CNA Registry: https://cna365.examroom.ai/registry/?StateCode=SC
           7. The provider must check the OIG exclusions lists for all staff prior to hire
              then at least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search results
              page must be maintained in each employee’s personnel file. Anyone on
              the OIG Registry is not allowed to provide services to waiver
              participants or participate in any Medicaid funded programs. The
              website addresses are listed below:

              OIG Exclusions List: https://exclusions.oig.hhs.gov/

      E.      Conduct of Service
           The Provider must maintain documentation showing that it has complied with the
           requirements of this section.

           1. The Provider must obtain a Service Plan for RPCPC services from the
              CM. The authorization will designate the amount, frequency and
              duration of service for Participants in accordance with the Participant’s
              Service Plan. The Provider must obtain an updated SCDHHS
              CLTCLTSS Service Plan from the case manager yearly. The Provider
              will receive new authorizations only when there is a change to the
              authorized service amount, frequency or duration. The Provider must
              adhere to those duties which are specified in the Service Plan in

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                  Residential Personal Care

            developing the provider task list. This provider task list must be
            developed by a RN or LPN. No direct care staff or nurse will perform
            any job/task related to OSCAP while on duty at any other health care
            entity. Any substantial finding that such a violation has occurred will be
            reported to the Board of Nursing, Board of Long-Term Health Care
            Administrators, the Bureau of Long-Term Care Certification, and the
            Attorney General office

         2. As part of the conduct of service, the PRC II services must be under the
            supervision of a RN or LPN who meets the requirements as stated in
            the scope of services and who will:

            a. Develop an Individual Care Plan (ICP) for each Participant receiving
               OSCAP services. The ICP for current Participants will be updated to reflect
               the Participant’s status in OSCAP. The ICP is to be developed with
               participation by the Participant, administrator (or designee), the responsible
               party when appropriate, and the facility’s nurse within seven (7) days of
               admission or within seven (7) days of the change to OSCAP.

                i.   The initial ICP will be developed utilizing information from the SCDHHS
                     nurse’s assessment and Service Plan, along with any other relevant
                     Participant information obtained from the Provider’s staff, the
                     Participant, and if appropriate, the party responsible for the Participant.
                     The ICP is to direct the services provided to the Participant and the
                     resident care log.

                ii. The ICP must be reviewed by the Participant, facility administrator, and
                    responsible party, when appropriate, every six (6) months or after being
                    reviewed and/or revised by the facility’s nurse. The ICP must be signed
                    and dated by the Participant, facility administrator, responsible party
                    when appropriate, and the facility’s Nurse. The revisions signed and
                    dated by the CRCF registered nurse must be maintained in the
                    resident’s record.

                iii. All ICP’s must be maintained in the Participant’s permanent record and
                     should be available for a SCDHHS representative to review upon
                     request.

            b. Not discuss services authorized by SCDHHS with the Participant. If
               Participants of any waiver ask about either the level of service they are
               receiving or the different services offered in one of the waivers, the nurse
               supervisor and/or aide must refer that Participant back to their CM for
               additional information.

            c. Be accessible by telephone during any hours services are being provided
               under this Contract.

            d. Provide and document supervision of, training for, and evaluation of aides.

            e. Assist aides as necessary as they provide individual personal care services
               as outlined by the Service Plan. Any supervision given must be
               documented in the individual Participant's record.

                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                   Residential Personal Care

         3. If the nurse supervisor position becomes vacant, SCDHHS must be
            notified no later than the ten (10) business day.

         4. Documentation of all supervision must be filed in the Participant’s
            record within thirty (30) days of the date of the contact.

         5. Supervisory contacts should be conducted as necessary if there are
            indications of substandard performance by the aide.

         6. If there is a break in service which lasts more than sixty (60) days, the
            supervisor must develop a new IPC when services are resumed. If the
            participant’s condition changes enough to warrant a new service plan,
            the supervisor must update the task sheet to reflect the new duties.

         7. The Provider must maintain an individual Participant record which
            documents the following:

            a. The Provider will initiate RPCPC services on the date negotiated with the CM
               and indicated on the Medicaid authorization. Services must not be provided
               prior to the authorized start date and must be provided according to the
               schedule as indicated on the Service Plan

            b. The Provider will notify the CM within two (2) working days of the following:

                i.   If Participant's condition has changed and the Service
                     Plan/Authorization no longer meets Participant's needs or the
                     Participant no longer appears to need – RPCPC

                ii. If Participant is institutionalized, dies or moves out of the service area

                iii. If Participant no longer wishes to receive RPCPC

                iv. Knowledge of the Participant's Medicaid ineligibility or potential
                    ineligibility

            c. The Provider will maintain a record-keeping system which documents the
               delivery of services in accordance with the Service Plan. The Provider shall
               not ask the Participant/responsible party to sign any log or task sheet. The
               task sheet must be reviewed, signed, with original signature (signature
               stamps are not acceptable), and dated every two weeks by the supervisor.
               Task sheets must be filed in the Participant’s record within thirty (30) days
               of service delivery.

            d. For all instances in which a Participant did not receive an authorized daily
               service, the Provider must indicate on the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV)
               System web site the reason why the service was not delivered. The Provider
               must do this both when the Provider was unable to complete the visit and
               when the Participant was not available to receive the visit. For each week in
               which there are missed visits, the Provider must indicate the reason on the
               web site by the close of business the following week.

            e. Whenever two consecutive attempted or missed visits occur, the local


                                South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                   Residential Personal Care

                  SCDHHS office must be notified. An attempted visit is when the aide is
                  unable to provide the assigned tasks because the participant is not at the
                  facility or refuses services. A missed visit is when the Provider is unable to
                  provide the authorized service. These instances must be documented in the
                  participant record as well as in the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV)
                  System.

           8. Providers must adhere to all Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System
              and Phoenix policies and procedures as indicated in the Phoenix EVV
              Provider User Guidelines, which can be obtained from the Phoenix
              Provider portal in the Help section.

      F.        Administrative Requirements
           1. The Provider must inform SCDHHS of the Provider’s organizational
              structure including the Provider personnel with authority and
              responsibility for employing qualified personnel, ensuring adequate staff
              education, in-service training and employee evaluations during the
              enrollment process. The Provider shall notify SCDHHS within three (3)
              working days in the event of a change in the agency administrator,
              address, phone number or an extended absence of the agency
              administrator.

           2. The Provider must provide SCDHHS with a written document showing
              the organization, administrative control and lines of authority for the
              delegation of responsibility down to the hands-on participant care level
              staff at contract implementation.

           3. The Provider shall not delegate administrative and supervisory functions
              to another agency or organization.

           4. The Provider will develop and maintain a Policy and Procedure Manual
              that describes how activities will be performed in accordance with the
              terms of the requirements of the Contract. The Policy and Procedure
              Manual shall be available during office hours for the guidance of the
              governing body and personnel and will be made available to SCDHHS
              upon request.

           5. The Provider shall ensure that key agency staffs are accessible in
              person or by telephone during compliance review audits conducted by
              SCDHHS and/or its agents.

           6. The Provider will ensure that its office is open and staffed by qualified
              personnel during normal business hours. Participant and personnel
              records must be maintained at the address indicated in the Contract
              and must be made available, upon request, for review by SCDHHS.

           7.

           8. The Provider must have an effective written back-up plan in place to
              ensure that the Participant receives the RPCPC services as authorized.
              Whenever the Provider determines that services cannot be provided as

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
HCBS Provider Manual                                                        July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                            Residential Personal Care

            authorized, the CM must be notified by Phoenix conversation
            immediately.




                              South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 8
