HCBS Provider Manual                                                                    July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                           Skilled Respite (MCC)

       MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES

                                                 FOR

                          SKILLED RESPITE (MCC)

      A.      Objective
           The objective of Skilled Respite services is to provide temporary care in the
           home for Medically Complex Children (MCC) waiver Participants. This service
           provides temporary relief for the primary caregivers to help maintain the
           participant at home.

      B.      Conditions of Participation
           1. The Provider must agree to participate in the Electronic Visit Verification
              system (EVV) monitoring and payment system.

                  a. EVV billing activity must be completed upon arrival at and departure
                     from the participant’s home.

           2. The Provider must utilize any other automated systems mandated by
              LTSS to document and bill for the provision of services.

      C.      Description of Services to be Provided
           1. The unit of service must be in one (1) hour increments. Participants can
              receive a maximum of 12 hours per month for the combination of skilled
              and unskilled respite services.

           2. The number of units of service authorized to each participant must be
              dependent upon the participant's needs as established and set forth in the
              participant’s Care Plan. Skilled Respite services may be provided for a
              specific period as stated in Service Provision Form.

           3. Skilled Respite services must provide skilled medical care as ordered by a
              physician and performed by a Registered Nurse or Licensed Practical Nurse
              with pediatric experience in compliance with the Nurse Practice Act and S.
              C. Code of Laws, Regulations, Chapter 91, State Board of Nursing.

           4. Skilled Respite services must include assistance with activities of daily
              living and instrumental activities of daily living as needed by the participant
              during the respite period.

      D.      Staffing


           1. The provider must have staff that meets the following requirements:


                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                 July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                        Skilled Respite (MCC)

                a. Currently licensed by the State of South Carolina to practice nursing.

                b. At least two (2) years’ experience with the pediatric population in a public
                   health, hospital, or long-term care setting; as evidenced by work
                   experience documented and maintained in the employee personnel file.

                c. The provider must verify nurse licensure at time of employment and must
                   ensure that the license remains active and in good standing at all times
                   during employment. The provider must maintain a copy of the current
                   license in the employee’s personnel file. Nurse licensure can be verified at
                   the State Board of nursing website.

                      https://verify.llronline.com/LicLookup/Nurse/Nurse.aspx?div=17

         2. Conditions for Qualification for Service

                a. A SLED criminal background check is required for all employees prior to
                   hire and at least every two years thereafter to include employees who will
                   provide direct care to SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants and all
                   administrative/office employees (office employees required to have SLED
                   background checks include: administrator, office manager, nurse
                   supervisor, and persons named on organizational chart in management
                   positions). All SLED criminal background checks must include all data for
                   the individual with no less than a ten (10) year timeframe being searched.
                   The SLED criminal background check must include statewide data. The
                   statewide data must include South Carolina and any other state or states
                   the worker has resided in within the prior (10) ten years. Potential
                   employees with felony convictions within the last ten (10) years cannot
                   provide services to SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants or work in an
                   administrative/office position. Potential employees with non-violent felonies
                   dating back ten (10) or more years can provide services to
                   SCDHHS/SCDDSN participants under the following circumstances:

                  •     Participant/responsible party must be notified of the employee’s
                        SLED criminal background, i.e., felony conviction, and year of
                        conviction;
                  •     Provider must obtain a written statement, signed by the
                        participant/responsibleparty acknowledging awareness of the
                        employee’s SLED criminal background and agreement to have the
                        employee provide care; this statement must be placed in the
                        participant record.

                      Potential administrative/office employees with non-violent felony
                      convictions dating back ten (10) or more years can work in the agency at
                      the provider’s discretion.

                      Hiring employees with misdemeanor convictions will be at the provider’s
                      discretion. Employees hired prior to July 1, 2007, and continuously
                      employed since then will not be required to have a SLED criminal
                      background check.



                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                    July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                           Skilled Respite (MCC)

                  b. The provider must check the OIG exclusions lists for all staff prior to hire
                     then at least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search results page
                     must be maintained in each employee’s personnel file. Anyone on the OIG
                     Registry is not allowed to provide services to waiver participants or
                     participate in any Medicaid funded programs. The website addresses are
                     listed below:

                      OIG Exclusions List: https://exclusions.oig.hhs.gov/

                  c. PPD Tuberculin Test Please refer to the Department of Public Health
                     (DPH) website for PPD Tuberculin test requirements.

                      https://scdhec.gov/sites/default/files/media/document/R.61-122.pdf

                      For additional information, providers must contact the Tuberculosis Control
                      Division, Department of Public Health, 1751 Calhoun Street, Columbia, SC
                      29201, phone (803) 898-0558.

           3. The provider must maintain a personnel file for each staff member and
              document that they have met the above requirements.

           4. Minimum training for Licensed Practical Nurses and Registered Nurses:

                  a. The provider assures SCDHHS that the nurse has adequate experience
                     and expertise to perform the skilled services ordered by the physician that
                     may include the skills necessary to care for a Participant who requires but
                     is not limited to tracheostomy, mechanical ventilator assistance,
                     gastrostomy or jejeunostomy tubes, and indwelling catheters.

                  b. The provider must provide a minimum of six (6) hours relevant in- service
                     training per year (based on date of employment) for each nurse.

      E.      Conduct of Service
           1. The provider shall provide SCDHHS with a list of regularly scheduled
              holidays for the coming calendar year each September. The Provider is not
              required to

           2. furnish services on regularly scheduled holidays. The Provider must not be
              closed for more than two (2) consecutive days, except when a holiday falls
              in conjunction with a weekend. In that case, the Provider may be closed for
              not more than four (4) consecutive days.

           3. The provider must adhere to any other criteria as established and
              disseminated by SCDHHS.

           4. An individual participant record must be maintained.

           5. The provider must be responsible for procuring the direct care orders from
              the physician prior to the start of services.

           6. Skilled Respite services must begin on the date and time negotiated by the


                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                     July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                            Skilled Respite (MCC)

              Care Coordinator and the provider in accordance with the family’s
              requests.

           7. The provider must send a treatment plan to the Care Coordinator which
              includes treatment goals, after completion of the first respite visit. If
              applicable, recommendations to change the service schedule from that of
              the initial Service Authorization Form may be sent to the Care Coordinator
              at that time.

           8. The provider must comply with the South Carolina Child Protection Reform
              Act (S.C. Code Ann. § 63-7-10 et seq. (Supp. 2008)), which requires the
              reporting of any suspected abuse, neglect or exploitation of a child aged 17
              and under as defined in the Act.

           9. The Skilled Respite service must not be provided prior to the authorized
              start date as stated on the Service Provision Form.

           10. The provider must notify the Care Coordinator within two (2) working days
               of the following participant changes:

                  a. Participant's condition has changed, and the Care Plan no longer
                     meets the participant's needs or the participant no longer needs Skilled
                     Respite services.

                  b. Participant is institutionalized, dies or moves out of the service area.

                  c. Participant no longer wishes to receive the Skilled Respite service.

                  d.

                  e. Knowledge of the participant's Medicaid ineligibility or potential
                     ineligibility.

           11. The provider must receive a Service Provision Form for Skilled Respite
               services designating the amount, frequency, and duration of service for
               participants in accordance with the participant's Care Plan. Service Provision
               Form must be maintained in the participant's file.

      F.      Administrative Requirements
           1. The provider must inform SCDHHS of the provider’s organizational structure
              including the Provider personnel with authority and responsibility for
              employing qualified personnel, ensuring adequate staff education, in-
              service training and employee evaluations. The provider agency shall
              notify SCDHHS within three (3) working days in the event of a change in
              the agency administrator, address, phone number or an extended absence of
              the agency administrator.

           2. The provider must provide SCDHHS with a written document showing the
              organization, administrative control and lines of authority for the delegation of
              responsibility down to the hands- on participant care level staff at contract
              implementation. The document must include an organizational chart

                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                 July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                        Skilled Respite (MCC)

            including names of those currently in the positions. Revisions or
            modifications to this organizational document must be provided to SCDHHS. It
            is recommended that this document be readily accessible to all staff.

         3. Administrative and supervisory functions shall not be delegated to another
            agency or organization.

         4. The provider agency shall acquire and maintain for the duration of the
            contract liability insurance and worker’s compensation insurance as
            provided in Article IX, Section D of the Contract. The provider is required to
            list SCDHHS – LTSS as a Certificate Holder for informational purposes
            only on all insurance policies using the following address: Post Office Box
            8206, Columbia, SC 29202-8206.

         5. The provider must develop and maintain a Policy and Procedure Manual
            that describes how activities must be performed in accordance with the
            terms of the requirements of the contract. The Policy and Procedure
            Manual shall be available during office hours for the guidance of the
            governing body and personnel and must be made available to SCDHHS
            upon request.

         6. The provider must comply with Article IX, Section Z of the Contract
            regarding safety precautions. The provider must also have an on-going
            infectious disease program to prevent the spread of infectious diseases
            among its employees. At minimum, the infectious disease program must
            include the following:

                a. Definition of infectious disease

                b. How an infectious disease is spread

                c. How to provide services in a way that prevents the spread of an infectious
                   disease

         7. The provider shall ensure that key agency staff are accessible in person,
            by phone, or by beeper during compliance review audits conducted by
            SCDHHS and/or its agents.

         8. The provider must ensure that its office is open and staffed by qualified
            personnel during the hours of 10:00 am to 4:00 pm., Monday through
            Friday. Outside of these hours, the Provider agency must be available by
            telephone during normal business hours, 8:30 am to 5:00 pm, Monday
            through Friday. Failure to maintain an open and staffed office as indicated
            must result in sanctions as outlined in section G, last paragraph. The
            provider must also have a number for emergencies outside of normal
            business hours. Participant and personnel records must be maintained at
            the address indicated in the contract and must be made available, upon
            request, for review by SCDHHS.

         9. The provider must have a written back-up service provision plan in place to
            ensure that the Participant receives the authorized respite services.
            Whenever the Provider determines that services cannot be provided as

                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                 July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                        Skilled Respite (MCC)

            authorized, the Care Coordinator or Care Advocate must be notified
            immediately by telephone. The provider must maintain documentation of
            the use of the backup plan in the participant’s file.

         10. The provider shall update holidays in Phoenix; the provider is not required
             to furnish services on those days. The provider agency must not be closed
             for more than two (2) consecutive days at a time, except when a holiday
             falls in conjunction with a weekend. If a holiday falls in conjunction with a
             weekend, the provider agency may be closed for not more than four (4)
             consecutive days.

         11. Providers may request educational training provided by SCDHHS at any
             time by making an email request to:

            Provider-distribution@scdhhs.gov




                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
