HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                       Tele-monitoring Service



       MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES
                                  FOR

                       TELEMONITORING SERVICE

      A. Objective

         The objectives of the Telemonitoring service are to maintain and promote the
         health status of Medicaid home and community-based waiver participants
         through medical telemonitoring of body weight, blood pressure, oxygen
         saturation, blood glucose levels, and basic heart rate information.

      B. Conditions of Participation – Providers
         1. Providers must have equipment that records at a minimum the participant’s
            body weight, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, blood glucose levels, and
            basic heart rate information. All agencies must also have nursing personnel
            and health care professionals able to carry out the duties of the service
            described below.

         2. Providers must agree to participate in all components of the Electronic Visit
            Verification (EVV) System monitoring and payment system and have the
            capability to receive and respond to authorizations for service in an
            electronic format.

         3. Providers must have at least one (1) year of experience or otherwise
            demonstrate competency in the provision of this service.


      C. Conditions of Participation – Community Choices Waiver
         Participants
         Community Choices waiver participants must meet the following criteria to be
         considered for the Telemonitoring service: Telemonitoring Assessment

         1. Have a primary diagnosis of Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus,
            Hypertension, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, and/or Congestive
            Heart Failure; and

         2. Have a history of at least two hospitalizations and/or emergency room visits
            in the past twelve (12) months; and

         3. Have a primary care physician that approves the use of the telemonitoring
            service and is solely responsible for receiving and acting upon the
            information received via the telemonitoring service; and

         4. Be capable of using the telemonitoring equipment and transmitting the

                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                       Tele-monitoring Service

            necessary data or have an individual available to them that can utilize the
            telemonitoring equipment and transmitting data to the telemonitoring
            provider.

         5. At a minimum, the South Carolina Department of Health and Human
            Services (SCDHHS) shall perform a reassessment of the telemonitoring
            service need at re-evaluation of level of care. The reassessment by
            SCDHHS shall be done to assess whether any of the above conditions have
            changed and to assess the continuing need for the service.

      D. Description of Services to be Provided
         1. The Unit of Service is one (1) day of direct telemonitoring provided to/for a
            participant in the participant’s place of residence.

         2. Home telemonitoring equipment must record, at a minimum, body weight,
            blood pressure, oxygen saturation, blood glucose, and basic heart rate
            information. The data must be transmitted electronically, and any
            transmission costs shall be incurred by the provider of the telemonitoring
            service. Medical professionals shall receive the data and determine if
            readings are within normal limits based upon guidelines provided by the
            physician.

         3. The daily reimbursement rate for the Telemonitoring service is inclusive of
            monitoring of data, charting data from the monthly monitoring, visits or calls
            made to the home to follow up with participants and/or caregiver, phone
            calls made to primary care physician(s) that are necessary while the
            participant is receiving the telemonitoring service, all installation of the
            equipment in the home, and training on the equipment’s use and care while
            it is in the participant’s home. This also includes equipment removal when
            the service is no longer authorized for the participant.

         4. The Provider shall provide the Telemonitoring service seven (7) days per
            week for all authorized time periods.

      E. Staffing
         The provider must provide all the following (some, but not all of which, may
         be provided through subcontracts):

         1. A registered nurse (RN) who meets the following requirements:




                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                       Tele-monitoring Service

            a. Currently licensed by the S.C. Board of Nursing or by a state that participates in
               the Nursing Compact

            b. At least one (1) year of experience as a RN in public health, hospital or long-
               term care nursing

            c. Capable of evaluating and monitoring vital signs and physiological data
               transmitted from the participant’s residence

            d. Able to assume responsibility for monitoring and training participants and/or
               caregivers in the use of telemonitoring equipment

            e. Able to use the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System

         2. Technicians that install telemonitoring equipment must meet the following
            requirements:

            a. Qualified as a technician to install telemonitoring equipment

            b. Capable of evaluating whether the telemonitoring equipment is
               functioning properly

            c. Able to assume responsibility for training participants and/or caregivers in the
               use of telemonitoring equipment

            d. Able to use the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System

         3. Agency staff may be related to participants served by the agency within
            limits allowed by the South Carolina Family Caregiver Policy. Copies of this
            policy are available upon request.

         4. A SLED criminal background check is required for all potential employees
            to include employees who shall provide direct care to SCDHHS participants
            and all administrative/office employees (office employees required to have
            SLED background checks include administrator, office manager, nurse
            supervisor, and persons named on organizational chart in management
            positions). All SLED criminal background checks must include all data for
            the individual with no less than a ten (10) year search. At a minimum, the
            SLED criminal background check must include statewide data. Potential
            employees with felony convictions within the last ten (10) years cannot
            provide services to LTSS participants or work in an administrative/office
            position. Potential employees with non- violent felonies dating back ten (10)
            or more years can provide services to SCDHHS participants under the
            following circumstances:

                  •    Participant/responsible party must be notified of the RN or
                       technician’s SLED criminal background.
                  •    Documentation signed by the participant/responsible party
                       acknowledging awareness of the SLED criminal background and
                       agreement to have the RN or technician provide care must be
                       placed in the participant record.

                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                         Tele-monitoring Service


            Potential administrative/office employees with non-violent felony convictions
            dating back ten (10) or more years can work in the agency at the Provider’s
            discretion.

            Hiring employees with misdemeanor convictions shall be at the Provider’s
            discretion.

         5. Personnel folders: Individual records shall be maintained to document that
            each member of the staff has met the above requirements.

      F. Conduct of Service
         The provider must maintain documentation showing that it has complied with the
         requirements of this section.

         1. Participants and/or caregivers shall choose among qualified providers of
            the telemonitoring service. Once a provider has been chosen by the
            participant and/or caregiver, the Telemonitoring provider shall receive a
            referral that must have information on the participant’s condition.
            Telemonitoring providers must accept or decline referrals from SCDHHS
            within two (2) working days. Failure to respond shall result in the loss of the
            referral.

         2. If the referral is accepted, the provider shall obtain the physician’s
            authorization for the Telemonitoring service. The provider shall notify the
            Case Manager when it has received the signed physician authorization for
            Telemonitoring form. A blank copy of the physician authorization form can
            be obtained on our website.

         3. The provider shall initiate Telemonitoring services on the date agreed upon
            by the Case Manager, provider, and participant indicated on the service
            authorization. The Case Manager must be notified if services are not
            initiated on that date. Services provided prior to the service authorization
            date are not reimbursable.

         4. The Case Manager shall authorize Telemonitoring services by designating
            the amount, frequency and duration of service for participants in
            accordance with the participant’s Service Plan. The Service Plan shall be
            developed utilizing the telemedicine assessment criteria and in consultation
            with the participant and others involved in the participant’s care. The Case
            Manager must update the Service Plan yearly, or more frequently as
            needed, and send it to the Provider.

         5. The Case Manager shall notify the provider immediately if services to a
            participant are to be terminated. However, the provider must refer to the
            language in the LTSS Services Provider Manual in Administrative and
            Billing Manual, General Information and Administration, regarding the
            Provider’s responsibility in checking the participant’s Medicaid eligibility
            status.

         6. The provider shall install the equipment in the home and train the

                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                         Tele-monitoring Service

            participant and/or caregiver in the use of the telemonitoring equipment. The
            installation and training must be done by a trained technician and/or RN
            knowledgeable of the equipment and able to address issues that may arise
            during training and in the installation of the product. The daily monitoring
            fee is inclusive of installation and training.

         7. As part of the conduct of service, Telemonitoring must be provided by a RN
            (or physician) who meets the requirements as stated in the scope and shall:

            a. Be responsible for daily medical telemonitoring of body weight, blood pressure,
               blood glucose levels, and basic heart rate information. Each day when the
               physiological data is conveyed, the nurse shall analyze and interpret the data.
               If the data continues to remain within normal limits, information shall be
               conveyed at least quarterly, or more often if requested by the primary care
               physician accepting responsibility for the telemonitoring information. The
               telemonitoring agency and primary care physician accepting responsibility for
               the data shall maintain a written protocol that indicates the manner in which
               data shall be shared in the event of emergencies or other medical
               complications that arise during the monitoring service.

            b. Call the participant at least monthly to determine if the participant and/or
               caregiver are utilizing the equipment correctly and that the equipment continues
               to operate appropriately.

         8. The provider shall notify the Case Manager in the event the provider
            becomes aware of any of the following situations:

            a. Participant is institutionalized, dies or moves out of the service area

            b. Participant no longer wishes to receive telemonitoring services

            c. Knowledge of the participant’s Medicaid ineligibility or potential ineligibility

            d. Participant is not able to utilize the telemonitoring equipment any longer

         9. Telemonitoring equipment located in the participant’s home must, at a
            minimum, be an FDA Class II Hospital grade medical device that includes a
            computer/ monitor that is programmable for a variety of disease states and
            for rate and frequency. The equipment must have a digital scale that
            measures accurately to at least 400 lbs. that is adaptable to fit a glucometer
            and a blood pressure cuff. All installed equipment must be able to measure,
            at a minimum, blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen saturation, blood glucose,
            body weight. Telephones, facsimile machines, and electronic mail systems
            do not alone meet the requirements of the definition of Telemonitoring but
            may be utilized as a component of the telemonitoring system. All data must
            be transmitted electronically, and any fees or costs associated with the
            transmission are the sole responsibility of the Provider. The
            maintenance, repair and/or replacement of any damaged telemonitoring
            equipment are the Provider’s sole responsibility and are not a reimbursable
            Medicaid service. Major telemonitoring equipment failures which affect the
            ability to transmit or receive data must be repaired within two (2) working

                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                         Tele-monitoring Service

              days. Any failure in the individual components of a telemonitoring system
              such as adaptability with a glucose monitor must need to be corrected
              within one week of discovering the problem associated with the additional
              equipment.

         10. The provider must maintain an individual participant record which
             documents the following items:

              a. Documentation that Telemonitoring services were initiated on the date agreed
                 upon by the Case Manager, provider, and participant indicated on the Medicaid
                 authorization. Services must not be provided prior to the authorized start date
                 and must be provided according to the schedule as indicated on the Service
                 Provision Form/Authorization.

              b. The written protocol for notifying the primary care physician of all Telemonitoring
                 services.

              c. The provider shall maintain a record keeping system which documents:

                i.    The delivery of services in accordance with the SCDHHS LTSS Service
                      Plan. Monitoring sheets that are reviewed and signed by the RN, must be
                      filed in the participant’s record within two (2) weeks of service delivery.

                ii.   Documentation that a participant phone call has been made on at least a
                      monthly basis to determine that the participant and/or caregiver are utilizing
                      the equipment correctly and that the equipment continues to operate
                      appropriately.

               iii.   In the event services cannot be provided as authorized, the provider must
                      maintain documentation of the reason(s) why services were not completed
                      as specified by the Service Provision Form/ Authorization.

      G. Administrative Requirements
         1. The Provider must inform SCDHHS of the Provider’s organizational
            structure including the Provider personnel with authority and responsibility
            for employing qualified personnel, ensuring adequate staff education, in-
            service training and employee evaluations. The Provider shall notify
            SCDHHS within three (3) working days in the event of a change in or the
            extended absence of the personnel with the above-listed authority.

         2.

         3. The Provider must provide SCDHHS with a written document showing the
            organization, administrative control and lines of authority for the delegation
            of responsibility down to the hands-on participant care level staff at contract
            implementation. The document must include an organizational chart
            including names of those currently in the positions. Revisions or
            modifications to this organizational document must be provided to
            SCDHHS. It is recommended that this document be readily accessible to all
            staff.

                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                       Tele-monitoring Service

         4. Administrative and supervisory functions shall not be delegated to another
            agency or organization.

         5. The Provider agency shall acquire and maintain, for the duration of the
            contract liability insurance and worker’s compensation insurance as
            provided in Article IX, Section D of the Contract. The Provider is required to
            list SCDHHS – LTSS as a Certificate Holder for informational purposes only
            on all insurance policies using the following address: Post Office Box 8206,
            Columbia, SC 29202-8206.

         6. The Provider shall develop and maintain a Policy and Procedure Manual
            that describes how activities shall be performed in accordance with the
            terms of the contract. The Policy and Procedure Manual shall be available
            during office hours for the guidance of the governing body and personnel
            and shall be made available to SCDHHS upon request.

         7. The Provider must comply with Article IX, Section AA of the Contract
            regarding safety precautions. The Provider must also have an on-going
            infectious disease program to prevent the spread of infectious diseases
            among its employees.

         8. The Provider shall ensure that key agency staff are accessible in person or
            by phone during compliance review audits conducted by SCDHHS and/or
            its agents.

         9. The Provider shall ensure that its office is open and staffed by qualified
            personnel during the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through
            Friday. Outside of these hours, the Provider agency must be available by
            telephone during normal business hours, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
            through Friday. The Provider must also have a number for emergencies
            outside of normal business hours. Participant and personnel records must
            be maintained at the address indicated in the contract and must be made
            available, upon request, for review by SCDHHS.




                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
