HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                         Transition Coordination

           MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES

                                                 FOR

              TRANSITION COORDINATION SERVICE

      A.      Objective
           The objective of Transition Coordination is to provide assistance with the
           transition process to Home Again participants. The Transition Coordination
           service must support the participants to make a successful transition into the
           community. The Transition Coordination service must also ensure continued
           access to appropriate and available services for participants to remain in the
           community.

      B.      Conditions of Participation
      1.          The Provider and provider staff delivering Transition Coordination must
                  be one of the following: Licensed Baccalaureate Social Worker (LBSW),
                  Licensed Master Social Worker (LMSW), Certified Case Manager (CCM),
                  Registered Nurse (RN), or individuals with a bachelor’s degree in a health
                  or human services field from an accredited college or university. The
                  provider and provider staff delivering the Transition Coordination Service
                  must have at least one of the following licenses and certificates:
                  Licensed Baccalaureate Social Worker (LBSW), Licensed Master Social
                  Worker (LMSW), Case Manager Certified (CMC), or Registered Nurse
                  (RN).

      2.          The license and certification must be in the state of South Carolina and in
                  good standing, if applicable.

      3.          The Provider must have demonstrated at least two (2) years of case
                  management experience with one (1) of the Home Again target
                  populations; either older adults or people with physical disabilities. The
                  Provider must have demonstrated at least two (2) years of case
                  management experience with one of the Home Again target populations;
                  either older adults or people with physical disabilities. Baccalaureate
                  Social Workers must have an additional two (2) years of Medicaid
                  Community Long Term (CLTC) Care Case Management experience.

      4.          The Provider must be able to provide the specified geographical area
                  (counties) in which they must deliver the Transition Coordination service.
                  Transition Coordinators servicing multiple area offices must designate a
                  CLTC office for training and meetings.

      5.          The Provider is responsible for the provision of all supplies and tools
                  necessary to carry out Transition Coordinator functions. The Provider is
                  responsible for assuring each Transition Coordinator has a laptop
                  computer meeting South Carolina Department of Health and Human


                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                       Transition Coordination

               Services (SCDHHS) specifications.

      6.       The Provider must ensure that Transition Coordinator does not service
               members of his/her own immediate family.

      7.       The Provider must be available by telephone to participants and
               SCDHHS staff Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and, if
               there is other employment, it shall not prevent the Transition Coordinator
               from performing Transition Coordination during these hours. The Provider
               must guarantee accessibility to participants and the program staff.

      8.       The Provider must also be available to meet with SCDHHS staff by
               either face-to-face or by phone.

      9.       The Provider must check voice mail at least twice daily Monday through
               Friday, excluding state holidays.

      10.      The Provider must sync with the Phoenix System prior to any field
               activity to verify services and daily if any work has been performed.

      11.      The Provider is responsible for the secure and accurate maintenance of all
               participant records.

      12.      The Provider must scan into Phoenix all consumer specific documents
               received from outside sources. All hardcopy records shall remain in the
               participant’s assigned Area Office.

      13.      The Provider must check and respond to e-mails daily, Monday through
               Friday.

      14.      The Provider must return calls related to participant care within 24 hours.

      15.      The Provider must ensure that each Transition Coordinator utilizes the
               Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System. The Electronic Visit
               Verification (EVV) System documentation must be completed upon each
               transition coordination visit and transition coordination contact. For home
               visits, the call to the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System must be
               completed while in the Participant’s home.

      16.      The Provider must ensure that each Transition Coordinator providing
               Transition Coordination services uses the Phoenix System to document
               all Transition Coordination activities, as specified in Section G.

      17.      The Provider must complete documentation in the Phoenix System within
               48 hours after the visit and contact.

      18.      The Provider must ensure that each Transition Coordinator meets the
               Training Requirements set out in Article F of this document.




                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                         Transition Coordination

      C.    Description of Services to be Provided
      1.         The Provider must use the Phoenix System to enter a list of regularly
                 scheduled holidays; the Provider shall not be required to furnish services
                 on those days. The Provider must not be closed for more than two
                 consecutive days at a time, except when a holiday falls in conjunction
                 with a weekend. If a holiday falls in conjunction with a weekend, the
                 Provider may be closed for not more than four consecutive days.

      2.         The Provider must make provisions for coverage during times when the
                 Provider is unavailable. Providers must have an office location.

      3.         Transition Coordination services must be performed as set forth in the
                 CLTC Area Office Home Again Policy.

      4.         The Transition Coordinator must use professional judgment in allotting
                 enough time to complete activities, including all visits and contacts.
                 Following is the minimum visit and contact schedule that the Provider
                 must conduct:

            a. Pre-transition planning: The Provider must complete an initial visit to the
               potential participant in a skilled nursing facility. A home visit is also required once
               housing is identified in the community.

            b. The Provider must be present either at the facility or at home in the community
               on the transition date.

            c. During the first two (2) months, there must be two (2) face-to-face visits and two

            d. (2) telephone calls per month.

            e. During months 3-12, the Providers must perform one (1) face-to-face visit every
               other month and one (1) monthly telephone call.

            f.   Additional visits and contact may be required as needed or if the transition is in
                 jeopardy. If the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System reflects that the amount
                 of time spent to complete the billed activities for a particular day does not meet
                 Home Again staff’s expectations of the time necessary to complete those
                 activities, then at SCDHHS’s sole discretion, Home Again staff may investigate
                 and may recoup payments for those activities from the Provider.

      D.    Transition Coordination
      1.         Cases must be assigned in accordance with the Participant’s choice.

      2.         The provider must notify SCDHHS within two (2) working days of its intent
                 to accept or decline a referral for Participant service.

      3.         The Transition Coordination service includes the following but is not
                 limited to:

            a. Initial visit to a skill nursing facility and a home in the community to determine

                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                    July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                           Transition Coordination

                   transition possibility

              b. Conducting comprehensive assessment to identify the participant’s needs

              c. Developing and monitoring transition plan with a participant and assist the
                 transition process

              d. Assist the participant with housing needs and ensure that the participant is
                 moving into a qualified “Home and Community based residence”

              e. Consult with Case Manager II in the CLTC Area Office for setting up Service
                 Plan, provider choices, referrals, and authorizations prior to the transitioning

              f.   Ongoing problem solving to address participant’s needs

              g. Maintain a 24/7 backup plan for critical services, as is requirement to be a
                 provider.

              h. Evaluate needs for Expanded and Goods and Services and submit filled out
                 Home Again Sales Quotation form to Home Again staff, if needed

              i.   Case termination and transferring

              j.   Any additional work required by Home Again staff, and which is amended to the
                   scope of service

      4.           The Provider must provide Transition Coordination services in
                   accordance with Home Again policies and procedures, applicable
                   SCDHHS policies and procedures, and applicable federal and state
                   statutes and regulations. All the foregoing provisions, policies,
                   procedures, statutes and regulations (together with any subsequent
                   amendments) are hereby incorporated as an integral part of this Scope
                   of Service.

      5.           Once a case has been relinquished or transferred to another provider,
                   the Provider must cease any contact with the Participant and/or primary
                   contact.

      E.      Staffing
           Provider must adhere to the following provisions related to staffing:

      1.           Transition Coordinators cannot simultaneously be working as a Medicaid
                   Waiver Case Manager with the same participant.

      2.           Transition Coordinators must have a current valid driver’s license.

      3.           When servicing Participants, Transition Coordinators must display a
                   picture identification badge identifying agency/organization or
                   independent status.

      4.           Transition Coordinators must comply with the continuing education
                   requirements necessary for their licensure/certificate.

                                            South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                    July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                           Transition Coordination

      5.       Transition Coordinators must have demonstrated skills in computer
               hardware/ software access and usage.

      6.       Transition Coordinators must agree to accept a minimum of one (1) case
               and cannot carry a caseload of over fifteen (15) cases at the same time
               without the approval of the Home Again staff.

      7.       PPD Tuberculin Test

               Please refer to the Department of Public Health (DPH) website for PPD
               Tuberculin test requirements.

               https://scdhec.gov/sites/default/files/media/document/R.61-122.pdf

               If Provider requires additional information, Provider must contact the
               Tuberculosis Control Division, Department of Public Health, 1751
               Calhoun Street, Columbia, SC 29201, phone (803) 898-0558.

      8.       Personnel folders: Individual records must be maintained to document
               that each member of the staff has met the above requirements.

      F.    Transition Coordination Training
      1.       Transition Coordinators must attend Medicaid sponsored Transition
               Coordination training, either in person or via online prior to being
               enrolled as the provider in Phoenix.

      2.       All new Transition Coordinators must meet or make a conference call
               with the Transition Coordination Manager prior to taking the first case.

      G.    Transition Coordination Activities and Rates
      1.       The provider must be paid based on each milestone: a) pre-transition
               planning, b) transitioning, c) six-month milestone from transition date, and
               d) one year milestone from transition date. See appendix A for the rates.

      2.       Providers have a responsibility to notify Home Again staff once each
               milestone has been met. The provider must complete the activities below
               to request the payments.

            a. Pre-transition planning

                  i.    Make initial visit to a nursing facility to meet with the potential
                        participant

                 ii.    Conduct the Risk Assessment to determine transition safety and
                        possibility

                 iii.   Document all visits and contacts into Phoenix System




                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                    July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                           Transition Coordination

                 iv.    Conduct a visit to the participant’s home in the community and
                        determine home modification needs

                  v.    Complete Quality of Life survey 3 weeks prior to transitioning

                 vi.    Discuss possible waiver services for the participant with CLTC
                        Case Manager II in the Area Office and follow up on the case to
                        make appropriate referrals and authorizations

                vii.    Ensure participants recurring income is transferred from nursing
                        facilities to the participants

                viii.   Complete all pre-transition planning checklist up to “1-2 days prior
                        to move” tab in Phoenix System

                        Make sure medications and/or prescriptions are acquired prior
                        to the discharge date

                        Note: The Provider will be paid $200 if the transition is deemed
                        unsafe and the case terminated

            b. Transitioning

                   i.   Be present at the nursing facility or at the participant’s home on
                        the transition date

                  ii.   Document all visits and contacts into Phoenix System

                 iii.   Explain to the participant all services the person will be receiving,
                        including Home Again demonstration program, waiver services,
                        and any additional community services

                 iv.    Ensure each waiver authorization has a service start date

                  v.    Monitor if the necessary Home Modifications are completed and
                        identify if house set up is completed

                 vi.    Complete activities on the “Day of Move” tab in Phoenix System

                vii.    Report Home Again staff and make a narrative in Phoenix if any
                        Critical Incident occurs. Critical Incidents include hospitalizations,
                        deaths due to abuse/neglect, deaths, contact with the criminal
                        justice System, and medication errors.

            c. Six-month milestone from transition date

                   i.   Comply with minimum visit/contact schedule as followed:

                                  •   Month 1-2: two (2) face-to-face visits and two (2) telephone calls

                                  •   Month 3-12: one (1) face-to-face visit every other month
                                      and one (1) telephone call each month


                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                 July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                        Transition Coordination

                 ii.    Document all visits/contacts into Phoenix System.

                 iii.   Complete activities on the “1st Week after Move” and “1st Month
                        after Move” tabs in Phoenix System

                 iv.    Report t o Home Again staff and make a narrative in Phoenix
                        if any Critical Incident occurs

            d. One year milestone from transition date

                  i.    Comply with visit/contact schedule, at least one face-to-face visit
                        every other month and one (1) telephone call each month.

                 ii.    Document all visits/contacts into Phoenix System.

                 iii.   Complete activities on the “11 Months after Move” tab in Phoenix
                        System.

                 iv.    Conduct a new Quality of Life survey in the 11th month from the
                        transition date.

                 v.     Follow case transferring policy and procedures after 365 days
                        from the transition date.

                 vi.    Report Home Again staff and make a narrative in Phoenix if
                        any Critical Incident occurs.

      H.    Administrative Requirements
      1.       The Provider must maintain an up-to-date organizational chart that is
               available to each employee.

      2.       The Provider must maintain written bylaws (or the equivalent) for
               governing the Provider’s operations.

      3.       The Provider must assure SCDHHS that a governing body or person(s)
               so functioning shall assume full legal authority for the operation of the
               provider agency.

      4.       The Provider shall acquire and maintain, during the life of the contract,
               general liability insurance and worker’s compensation insurance. The
               Provider is required to list SCDHHS- Home Again as certificate holder for
               notice purposes on all insurance policies using the following address:
               Post Office Box 8206, Columbia, SC, 29202-8206.

      5.       The Provider must have an effective written back-up service provision
               plan in place to ensure that the participant receives the Transition
               Coordination services. Whenever the Provider determines that services
               cannot be provided as authorized, the Provider shall immediately notify
               Home Again Transition Coordination Manager and the waiver Case
               Manager by Phoenix conversation.

      6.       The Provider is responsible for continuing Transition Coordination

                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                 July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                        Transition Coordination

               activity for all cases in the Provider’s caseload. Should the Provider be
               unable to cover a case(s), the Provider shall immediately notify
               Transition Coordination Manager by Phoenix conversation.

      7.       Upon request by SCDHHS, the Provider must be responsible for
               appropriate participation in the SCDHHS Appeals and Hearings process
               with respect to appeals of any action involving the Provider.

      8.       The Provider is subject to recoupment for payments made for services
               because of authorizations issued by provider staff not consistent with
               Home Again policies and procedures and in accordance with the
               Transition Coordination Scope of Service.

      9.       The Provider must disclose to SCDHHS the names and relationships of
               any relatives of the Provider or its staff who provide items or services to
               Medicaid Participants. For purposes of this Contract, the Provider means
               all owners, partners, managing employees, directors and any other
               person involved in the direct management and/or control of the business
               of the Provider. The Provider’s staff includes everyone who works for or
               with the Provider, including independent contractors, in the provision of
               or billing for services described in this Contract. Relative means persons
               connected to the Provider by blood or marriage.

               The Provider must disclose all such relationships in writing to Home Again,
               SCDHHS, within two (2) days of learning of the relationship. The
               Provider, in executing this Contract, certifies that it has in place policies,
               procedures or other mechanisms acceptable to SCDHHS to identify and
               report these relationships.

               Failure to report a relationship timely or to have the appropriate policies
               and procedures in place may result in sanctions by SCDHHS up to and
               including termination of this Contract for cause.




                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 8
