HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                               Adult Day Health Care - Nursing

          MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES
                                     FOR

             ADULT DAY HEALTH CARE — NURSING

     A.    Adult Day Health Care (ADHC) Nursing services are available for those
           participants attending ADHC under authorization of a Medicaid Home and
           Community-Based waiver. This service must be ordered by a physician, nurse
           practitioner, or physician assistant to meet the participant’s care needs and must
           be prior authorized by the case manager (CM) or waiver case manager (WCM).
           This service must be provided at the ADHC center by a licensed nurse, on a day
           the participant is attending Medicaid sponsored ADHC.
     B.    ADHC Nursing service procedures are limited to those skilled procedures listed
           below as ordered by a physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant:
              •   Ostomy care
              •   Urinary catheter care
              •   Decubitus and/or wound care
              •   Tracheostomy care
              •   Tube feedings
              •   Nebulizer treatments that require medication
           One unit of ADHC Nursing consists of any combination of one or more of the
           listed ADHC Nursing service procedures listed above provided to a Medicaid
           Home and Community-Based waiver ADHC participant during one day’s
           attendance at ADHC.
     C.    Authorization for ADHC Nursing must be separate from the ADHC authorization
           and must not be day specific unless so ordered by a physician.
     D.    Services provided prior to the Medicaid authorization date are not reimbursable.


     E.    If the need for skilled services is indicated on the SCDHHS Form 122DC
           (Community Long Term Care Adult Day Health Care form), the ADHC provider
           must obtain the prescriber’s orders for the ADHC Nursing service from the
           physician using SCDHHS Form 122 A (Adult Day Health Care Nursing
           Prescriber’s Orders).
           Orders from physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant must be updated
           at least every ninety (90) days and maintained by the provider in the participant
           record.
           New orders from physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant are required
           for any change in the type or frequency of ADHC Nursing services provided to the
           participant. Within three (3) working days of a physician, nurse practitioner, or

                                          South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                              Adult Day Health Care - Nursing

           physician assistant’s verbal order, the ADHC provider must obtain a written order
           from the physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant. The provider must
           document the order in the participant record and communicate the order to the
           CM/WCM in writing using SCDHHS Form 122 A. The provider must receive the
           Service Provision Form authorizing ADHC Nursing services from the CM/WCM
           prior to beginning service provision.
           Participant must be made aware of any changes to the physician, nurse
           practitioner, or physician assistant order for ADHC Nursing services.
     F.    All ADHC Nursing services must be provided within the scope of the South
           Carolina Nurse Practice Act or as otherwise provided within State law. Providers
           in bordering states that provide services to South Carolina Medicaid participants
           must comply with all laws applicable to the provision of nursing services in that
           state.
     G.    The ADHC Nursing services provider must maintain a participant record containing
           documentation that supports services provided and billed to include at minimum
           the following:
           1. SCDHHS Form 122 A
           2. Nursing Notes
           3. Documentation of participant notification of any changes.
     H.    Providers of ADHC Nursing services must utilize the automated systems mandated
           by SCDHHS to document and bill for the provision of services.




                                        South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
