HCBS Provider Manual                                                                 July 1, 2025,
Scopes of Services                                                  Attendant Care (Self-Directed)

       MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES

                                               FOR

              ATTENDANT CARE (SELF-DIRECTED)

      A.      Overview

             Attendant Care is hands-on care of both a supportive and health related nature.
             Supportive services are those which substitute for the absence, loss, diminution, or
             impairment of a physical or cognitive function. Services are self-directed by the
             participant or appointed employer of record. Self-direction includes the supervision
             of the attendant’s employment as well as the scheduling of services. A fiscal
             intermediary contracted by SCDHHS is utilized to process payment to attendant.

      B.      Minimum Qualifications
           1. Attendant Care providers, ( attendants), must meet the following
              minimum qualifications:

                  a. Demonstrate an ability to read, write and communicate with the participant
                     and/or Employer of Record.

                  b. Fully ambulatory;

                  c. Capable of aiding in activities of daily living; physically capable of
                     performing duties which may require physical exertion such as lifting,
                     transferring, etc. if necessary;

                  d. Capable of following a service plan with participant and/or representative
                     supervision;

                  e. Be at least 18 years of age;

                  f.   Capable of following billing procedures and completing required paperwork;

                  g. Have no known conviction for any of the following:

                         • abuse, neglect, or exploitation of adults (as defined in the
                           Omnibus Adult Protection Act, S.C. Code Ann. Title 43,
                           Chapter 35) or of children (as defined in the Children’s Code,
                           S.C. Code Ann. Title 63, Chapter 7);

                         • no known conviction for any crime against another person;

                         • Have no known felony conviction of any kind;


                  h. No known conviction of any kind concerning the misuse or abuse of any
                     public assistance program (including, but not limited to, fraudulently

                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2025,
Scopes of Services                                                Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
                     obtaining benefits, engaging in fraudulent billing practices, and embezzling
                     or otherwise misusing public assistance funds in any manner) No
                     exclusion for Medicare or Medicaid Programs;

                i.   Upon request the attendant must provide references to the participant
                     and/or representative;

                j.   Tuberculosis Screening

                     Prior to the attendant’s Medicaid provider enrollment date, the attendant
                     must provide evidence of having a single Blood Assay for Mycobacterium
                     tuberculosis (BAMT) or a baseline two-step Tuberculin Skin Test in the
                     following manner:

                     1. With a documented negative Tuberculin Skin Test or a BAMT result
                        within the previous twelve (12) months, attendants may have a BAMT
                        or a single Tuberculin Skin Test, administered and read, to serve as the
                        baseline prior to provider enrollment.

                     2. Without documented negative Tuberculin Skin Test or a Blood Assay for
                        TB result within the previous twelve (12) months, attendant shall have a
                        BAMT or a two-step Tuberculin Skin Test, administered and read prior
                        to provider enrollment.

                        After known exposure to a person with potentially infectious TB disease
                        without the use of adequate personal protection, the attendant must
                        ensure his or her TB status is determined in a manner prescribed in the
                        current Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and SC Department
                        of Public Health tuberculosis guidelines. If TB is present, the attendant
                        must report any known or suspected cases of TB disease to the local
                        SC Department of Public Health’s Public Health Clinic. A listing is
                        located here: Public Health Clinics | South Carolina Department of
                        Public Health.


                k. Annual Risk Assessment

                        Attendants must submit a Health Care Personnel (HCP) Baseline
                        Individual TB Risk Assessment annually to remain eligible to serve as
                        an attendant. Forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of the annual
                        assessment, the University of South Carolina Center for Disability
                        Resources (USC-CDR) will notify active enrolled attendants of the
                        expiration of their annual TB risk assessment. Attendant are
                        considered at increased risk for TB if any of the statements on the risk
                        assessment are marked "Yes." Attendants determined on the
                        assessment to be at risk for TB must provide evidence of a single
                        BAMT or a baseline two-step Tuberculin Skin Test with the annual risk
                        assessment. If the attendant does not submit the annual TB risk
                        assessment, USC-CDR must notify SCDHHS. SCDHHS will suspend
                        the provider in the Phoenix Resource Directory and notify the CM.
                        The CM will notify the participant that current services for attendant
                        must be terminated in ten (10) business days to allow participants time
                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2025,
Scopes of Services                                                   Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
                          to secure replacement services. SCDHHS will terminate the
                          attendant’s enrollment as provider once termination of services is
                          complete.

                          Attendants needing additional information must contact the
                          Tuberculosis Control Division, Department of Public Health, 400
                          Otarre Parkway, Cayce, SC 29033-3751 phone (803) 898-0558.

           2. Attendant may be related to participants served by the agency within limits
              allowed by the South Carolina Family Caregiver Policy. The following
              family members cannot be a paid caregiver:

                  a. A parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

                  b. A stepparent of a minor Medicaid participant;

                  c. A foster parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

                  d. Person who has the legal responsibility of utilizing their own assets
                     for the care of the Medicaid participant (legally responsible adult)



      C.      Minimum Training Requirements
             The following are the minimum training requirements for attendants:

           1. Prior to the first authorization being issued, all attendants who have been
              matched with their first participant are required to attend Electronic Visit
              Verification (EVV) System/billing training in the SCDHHS Area office
              which covers the geographical area where the participant resides.


           2. Training may be furnished by the USC-CDR licensed nurse (USC nurse)
              while the attendant is furnishing care to the participant. The USC nurse
              may also identify additional training needs and assist the attendant with
              locating training to address those needs.

              Participant-specific training for the attendant and/or participant/
              representative may be provided as deemed necessary based on the
              professional judgment of the licensed USC nurse or when the
              participant/representative or attendant requests assistance with training
              related to specific tasks.

      D.      Supervision
              The attendant must be supervised by the participant or representative for
              whom the safety and efficacy of participant/representative supervision
              has been certified by the licensed USC nurse. The licensed USC nurse
              must determine when a participant or representative is no longer certified
              to provide supervision for the attendant.


                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2025,
Scopes of Services                                                   Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
      E.      Infection Control
             The attendant must always adhere to basic infection control procedures
             while providing attendant care services.

      F.      Description of Services to be Provided

           1. The unit of service is authorized in one (1) hour increments and must
              consist of direct Attendant Care services provided in the participant’s home
              (except when services such as laundry, shopping or escort must be done
              off-site). The attendant must clock in and out at the participant’s residence.
              The attendant may then leave the home and provide a task as outlined in
              the participant’s service plan. Attendant clock out at a location other than
              the participant’s residence must be due to the provision of a task outlined
              in the participant’s service plan.

           2. The number of units and service provided to each participant is dependent
              upon the individual participant’s needs as set forth in the participant’s
              approved Service Plan. Services must be participant specific and for the
              direct benefit of the participant. If the assessed need for services exceeds
              40 hours per week, every effort must be made to identify a separate
              attendant to provide the services over 40 hours per week. If an attendant is
              authorized to provide services for more than one participant, every effort
              must be made to ensure that the attendant does not exceed 40 hours per
              week for the combined hours for all participants.

           3. Attendant Care services include:

                  a. Support for activities of daily living (e.g., assistance with bathing, dressing,
                     feeding, personal grooming, personal hygiene, transferring and mobility

                  b. Meal or snack preparation, planning and serving, cleaning up afterwards,
                     following specially prescribed diets as necessary and encouraging
                     participants to adhere to any specially prescribed diets

                  c. General housekeeping includes cleaning, laundry, and other activities as
                     needed to maintain the participant in a safe and sanitary environment;
                     Housekeeping only includes areas specific to the participant such as
                     the participant’s bedroom, bathroom, etc.

                  d. Complete shopping and/or essential errands for the participant

                  e. Escorting the participant to covered Medicaid medical services.
                     Attendants are not allowed to provide transportation. Participants can
                     utilize non-emergency medical transportation or other transportation
                     must be arranged.

                  f.   Assistance with communication which includes, but is not limited to,
                       placing a phone within participant’s reach, physically assisting participant
                       with use of the phone, and orientation to daily events;

           g. Monitoring medication, e.g., informing the participant that it is time to take
                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                   July 1, 2025,
Scopes of Services                                                    Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
              medication as prescribed by his or her physician/prescriber and as written
              directions on the box or bottle indicate. It does not mean that the attendant is
              responsible for giving the medicine; however, it does not preclude the attendant
              from handing the medicine container or medicines already set up in daily
              containers to the participant

      G.      Record Keeping
             The attendant shall maintain an individual participant record for each
             participant. This participant record is subject to the confidentiality rules for
             all Medicaid providers and shall be made available to SCDHHS upon
             request. This record shall include the following:

           1. Current and historical Service Provision Forms (Service
              Authorization) specifying units and services/duties to be provided;

           2. The HCBS participant’s Service Plan;

           3. The attendant must complete a daily log reflecting the attendant care
              services provided for the participant and must submit the logs to the
              Area Office at appropriate times for review;

              Attendant Care Log

           4. A copy of the participant’s back-up plan for service provision when the
              primary attendant is unable to provide services. (The
              participant/representative must make prior arrangements with family
              members, other formal or informal supports or another enrolled attendant
              for care provision in the absence of the primary attendant).

      H.      Conduct of Services
           1. The attendant must initiate attendant care services on the date agreed
              upon by the participant/representative, attendant and the CM. This date
              must be the start date on the written authorization for services. Services
              provided prior to the authorized start date as stated on the Service
              Provision Form will not be reimbursed.

           2. The case manager must authorize attendant care services by designating
              the authorized units of services in accordance with the participant’s
              Service Plan. The attendant must adhere to those duties. The participant
              and/or representative must self-direct the provision of care and coordinate
              with the attendant for the time for service delivery and specific tasks to be
              performed. The amount of time authorized does not include transportation
              time to and from the participant’s home.

           3. If the attendant or the participant/representative identifies attendant care
              duties that would be beneficial to the participant’s care but are not
              specified in the participant’s Service Plan, the attendant or
              participant/representative must contact the case manager to discuss the
              possibility of having these duties included in the service plan. The decision
              to modify the duties to be performed by the attendant is the responsibility of

                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                    July 1, 2025,
Scopes of Services                                                     Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
            the case manager.

         4. The attendant must notify the case manager immediately of the following
            participant changes:
                a. Participant’s condition has changed, and the Service Plan no longer meets
                    participant’s need, or the participant no longer appears to need attendant
                    care services.

                b. Participant/representative no longer appears capable of providing
                   supervision for the attendant.

                c. Participant/representative no longer wants to serve as Employer of
                   Record/ representative.

                d. Participant dies or moves out of the service area.

                e. Participant/representative no longer wishes to receive attendant care
                   services.

                f.   Knowledge of the participant’s Medicaid ineligibility or potential ineligibility.

         5. The attendant must notify Adult Protective Services if he/she has
            knowledge of, or reason to believe, that the participant has been or is
            likely to be abused, neglected or exploited.

         6. The participant must have an effective back-up service provision plan in
            place to ensure that the participant receives services in the absence of the
            primary attendant.

         7. When the attendant determines that services cannot be provided by the
            attendant as authorized, the attendant must immediately notify the case
            manager and the participant/representative by telephone.

         8. When two consecutive attempted visits occur, the CM must be notified
            immediately. An attempted visit occurs when the attendant arrives at the
            home and is unable to provide the assigned tasks because the
            participant is not at home or refuses services.

         9. The attendant must notify the CM immediately if the attendant wishes to
            terminate as the provider.

            The attendant is responsible for giving participants a written description of
            the state law concerning advance directives in accordance with the Patient
            Self- Determination Act. USC-CDR must assist attendants in meeting this
            requirement.

         10. The attendant shall adhere to all SCDHHS policies, procedures and
             Medicaid provider manuals including policies regarding billing, claims
             adjustments, fiscal intermediary requirements, etc.

         11. The attendant must comply with all Electronic Visit Verification (EVV)
             System requirements for all participants.

                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                   July 1, 2025,
Scopes of Services                                                    Attendant Care (Self-Directed)


      I.    Skilled Services Provided by an Approved Attendant
            The waiver service definition for attendant care allows a participant or the
            designee to self-direct “skilled service activities” performed by the attendant with
            approval from the participant’s physician, nurse practitioner or physician
            assistant. These activities are considered “health maintenance activities” which
            could be performed by the participant if the individual were physically and mentally
            capable. With physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant approval,
            attendants may provide skilled services which are considered health maintenance
            activities for participants in HCBS waivers that include attendant care services.

            When a referral is being made to USC-CDR for Attendant Care, and the
            participant requests that the attendant provide skilled service activities, the waiver
            case manager must include a comment on the referral stating
            “Participant/representative has requested a skilled service to be provided.”

            For existing referrals, already in process with USC-CDR, when a skilled service
            need has been identified, the waiver case manager must note in the comment
            section on the referral, “Participant/representative has requested a skilled
            service to be provided” AND email USC-CDR to notify them of the change in
            the referral. UAP will not receive a Phoenix notification that there is a change to
            the referral.

            US-CDR must send the SCDHHS Form A-1 “Medicaid Home Community-based
            Waiver Prescriber’s Statement For Participant Directed Attendant Care” and a copy
            of the legislation to the assigned CM, who must provide the form and a copy of the
            legislation to the participant or attendant’s Employer of Record. The Participant or
            Employer of Record or Designee is responsible for obtaining the prescriber’s
            approval/signature.

            Once the signed Prescriber’s Statement has been received, the CM must scan the
            form into Phoenix scans under the Attendant scan tag and email USC-CDR to
            notify the form has been returned and scanned. The USC nurse must complete the
            attendant match visit once this notification is received by email.

            The following list of services are examples of activities which may be
            appropriate for the attendant to perform. This list is not all inclusive.

                  •    Tracheostomy care
                  •    Ventilator Care - taking on and off the vent
                  •    Suctioning- tracheostomy/ oral
                  •    Finger stick blood glucose monitoring
                  •    Wound care
                  •    Enteral feedings (PEG or Nasogastric)
                  •    Bowel program
                  •    Ostomy care
                  •    Catheter care


            Any other skilled service requested by the participant/Employer of
                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2025,
Scopes of Services                                                Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
            Record/Designee or physician/nurse practitioner/physician assistant requires
            SCDHHS approval.

            NOTE: If the participant changes physician, nurse practitioner, or physician
            assistant and the prescriber who signed the SCDHHS Form A-1 is no longer
            involved in the participant’s care, a new SCDHHS Form A-1 is required.

            If the service is directed by the Employer of Record (EOR) instead of the
            participant and the EOR is no longer able to direct the skilled service activities
            performed by the attendant, a SCDHHS Form A-1 is required.




                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 8
