HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                   Case Management Services

       MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES
                                     FOR

                              CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES

      A.         Objective
                The objective of Case Management Services is to assist Participants in
                gaining access to needed waiver and other State plan services; as well as
                medical, social, educational, and other services, regardless of the funding
                source for those services. Case Managers are responsible for the ongoing
                monitoring and coordination of the provision of services included in the
                participant’s person-centered service plan.

      B.         Provider Conditions of Participation
           1.           The Provider must have demonstrated experience providing Case
                        Management in a health and human services setting.

           2.           The Provider must be licensed to operate a business in the State
                        of South Carolina and be in good standing with the State and
                        counties served.

           3.           Upon application, the provider must demonstrate knowledge of the
                        SC long-term care continuum and community resources.

           4.           The Provider must have four (4) or more employees, two (2) of
                        which must be a licensed Social Worker; or have a bachelor’s
                        degree or master’s degree with at least two years of assessment
                        and care planning experience with participants. Independent
                        providers contracted prior to September 1, 2016, may continue to
                        provide case management activities to participants served under
                        this waiver.

           5.           The Provider must be capable of providing case management
                        services in the entire geographical area of at least one (1) CLTC
                        Regional Office. The Provider must not refuse to accept cases
                        within its area of service based on geographical location.

           6.           The Provider and its staff must be independent of the service
                        delivery system and not a provider of services that could be
                        incorporated into a HCBS participant's plan of care (“conflict free
                        case management”). These services include, but are not limited to,
                        HCBS waiver services, home health services, and hospice
                        services. SCDHHS is the final decision authority regarding
                        questions concerning conflict free case management.

           7.           The Provider must provide all supplies, tools, equipment, and
                        technology necessary for its Case Managers and Case
                        Management Supervisors to carry out case management

                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                            July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                 Case Management Services

                      functions. SCDHHS will post equipment requirements in the “Help”
                      section of Phoenix.

           8.         The Provider must ensure that Case Managers and Case
                      Management Supervisors do not serve members of their own
                      families.

           9.         Provider agencies must be housed in an office that is in a
                      commercial zoned or un-zoned area. Any agency not housed
                      within a commercial location must be prior approved by SCDHHS
                      to enroll as a case management provider. Agencies requesting
                      prior approval must submit the following documents/evidence:

                      a. county/municipal zoning permit to operate a business

                      b. Business licenses as required

                      c. Evidence agency meets applicable county/municipal, mixed-use zoning
                              guidelines

                      d. Pictures exhibiting:
                                  i. business entrance door
                                  ii. Office space devoted entirely for the business; space must
                                       be enclosed and have a locking door
                                  iii. Outside business sign conforming to county/municipal sign
                                       and zoning codes
           10.        Independent providers are not required to maintain office space.
                      Administrative reviews must be conducted with the Case Manager
                      present in the CLTC area office.

      C.         Conduct of Service
           1.         The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers are
                      available by telephone to SCDHHS staff Monday through Friday,
                      8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

           2.         The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers are available to
                      Participants from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
                      and as required by Participant needs.

           3.         The Provider must ensure that if a Case Manager has other
                      employment, it does not prevent the case manager from
                      performing case management activities between 8:30a.m. and
                      5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and as required by Participant
                      needs. The Provider must ensure that Case Managers do not
                      have other employment for more than four (4) hours between
                      8:30am and 5:00pm, Monday through Friday. The Provider must
                      also ensure that its Case Managers hired before August 1, 2014,
                      do not accept additional employment that will exceed this rule if
                      they are not currently employed beyond this requirement. The
                      Provider must ensure accessibility of its Case Managers to HCBS

                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                              Case Management Services

                  program staff, service providers, and participants.

         4.       The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers and Case
                  Management Supervisors are available to meet with SCDHHS
                  staff in area offices or by phone as required for case management
                  activities. These activities include, but are not limited to:

               a. Discussing quality assurance findings,

               b. Participating in team staffing of existing and new cases,

               c. Attending training and meetings on policy updates (off-site as required),

               d. Conducting case transfers, and

         5.       The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers check voice
                  mail and respond appropriately at least twice daily, Monday
                  through Friday, excluding state holidays.

         6.       The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers return calls
                  related to participant care before noon must be returned by 5:00
                  p.m. that day; calls received after noon must be returned by noon
                  on the next business day.

         7.       The Provider must ensure the secure and accurate maintenance
                  of all electronic and hard-copy participant records assigned to its
                  Case Managers,

         8.       The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers adhere to
                  documentation policy posted in the “Help” section of Phoenix.

         9.       The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers check and
                  respond to email daily, Monday through Friday.

         10.      The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers use the
                  Electronic Visit Verification System (EVV). Documentation must be
                  completed according to the current policy. For home visits, the
                  EVV must be utilized while in the Participant’s home.

         11.      The Provider must ensure that each of its Case Managers providing
                  Case Management services uses the Phoenix System and/or
                  other systems as designated by SCDHHS for all case
                  management activities, including but not limited to, re-evaluations,
                  service planning, documentation, and verification of continued
                  financial eligibility.

         12.      The Provider must have an effective, written back-up plan for the
                  provision of services to ensure that participants receive case
                  management services as authorized when the assigned Case
                  Manager is not available to provide services.

         13.      At a minimum the back-up plan must include:


                                South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                             July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                  Case Management Services

                   a. The name of the Case Manager(s) who will cover the cases while the
                      regular case manager is away

                   b. (For Independent Case Managers only) a signed agreement between the
                      assigned Case Manager and the back-up Case Manager who will cover
                      the cases during the period when the assigned Case Manager is away,

                   c. The procedure for notifying the Participant when the back-up plan must
                      be used,

                   d. The procedure for transferring cases to the back-up Case Manager in
                      Phoenix, and

                   e. The procedure for notifying the Area Administrator/Lead Team Case
                      Manager when the back-up plan is initiated.

                      If the Provider determines that services cannot be provided as
                      authorized, the Area Administrator/Lead Team Case Manager
                      must be notified by telephone immediately and cases relinquished
                      back to the state.

           14.        The Provider must ensure that each Case Manager and Case
                      Management Supervisors meets the Training Requirements in
                      Article G of this document.

           15.        The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers serve a
                      maximum of two contiguous CLTC Area Offices unless approved
                      by SCDHHS. Case Managers serving two Area Offices must
                      designate one CLTC Area Office as the primary office for training
                      and meetings.

           16.        Violations of the Conduct of Service will result in sanctions. See
                      Sanction Guidelines posted in the “Help” section of Phoenix.




      D.         Description of Services to Be Provided
           1.         The unit of service must be specified in the approved waiver
                      document.

           2.         The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers use
                      professional judgment in allotting an appropriate amount of time to
                      complete each participant-related activity for which billing is
                      submitted. These activities include Case Management Contacts
                      and Initial, Quarterly, and Re-evaluation Visits. If the amount of
                      time spent to complete the billed activities for a particular day does
                      not meet SCDHHS’s expectations of the time necessary to
                      complete those activities, then SCDHHS, in its sole discretion,
                      may conduct an investigation and impose sanctions.

           3.         SCDHHS sets minimum and maximum limits on caseload sizes.

                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                            July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                 Case Management Services

                     The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers abide by these
                     limits, which are available in the “Help” section of Phoenix. Once a
                     case is accepted, it must be retained by the Provider and assigned
                     Case Manager for ninety (90) days unless otherwise requested by
                     the participant. The maximum caseload limit takes into
                     consideration all participants assigned to a Case Manager/Case
                     Management Supervisor in a given month, including assignments
                     for a partial month.

           4.        The Provider must ensure that cases are maintained through an
                     entire month unless otherwise requested by the Participant.
                     SCDHHS and Area Office(s) must be notified as soon as possible
                     of any pending cases to be relinquished. The Provider must justify
                     any notification that is provided less than fourteen days prior to the
                     end of the month. The Provider must immediately notify Central
                     Office when an employee with access to Phoenix separates from
                     the case management Provider.

      E.        Case Management
           1.        Cases are referred to Providers in accordance with the Participant’s
                     choice. In no case shall a Provider solicit any waiver Participant. If
                     a Case Manager leaves the Provider, that Case Manager may not
                     solicit the Participant to follow him/her. Solicitation is cause for
                     immediate termination.

           2.        The Provider must notify SCDHHS within two (2) business days to
                     accept or decline a referral for Participant service. Once a
                     Participant is accepted, team staffing must occur within two (2)
                     business days.

           3.        Case Management services include the following:

                  a. Regularly contacting the Participant during initial visits,
                     monthly contacts, quarterly visits, and re-evaluation visits. The
                     Provider must ensure that at least one of these case
                     management activities and all of its necessary components
                     are completed every month and documented appropriately.

                  b. In conjunction with the Participant, developing and monitoring
                     needs and personal goals and performing ongoing evaluation
                     of the service plan to include team staffing.

                  c. Completing authorizations for waiver services (including initial
                     authorization, changes, and terminations).

                  d. Resource assessment and development, with referrals to other
                     agencies as needed.

                  e. Service coordination, to include coordination of community-
                     based support and participation in interagency case staffing.


                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                            July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                 Case Management Services

                  f.   Ongoing case monitoring and problem solving to address
                       participant’s needs throughout the month.

                  g. Re-evaluation activities including but not limited to team
                     staffing with designated reviewers.

                  h. Service counseling with participant and families.

                  i.   Case termination and transfer.

           4.          The Provider must ensure that Case Management services and
                       other related activities provided by its Case Managers and Case
                       Management Supervisors are provided in accordance with the
                       HCBS Services Provider manual, HCBS program policies and
                       procedures, any applicable SCDHHS policies and procedures, the
                       SCDHHS Case Management contract, and any applicable federal
                       and state statutes and regulations. All the foregoing provisions,
                       policies, procedures, statutes, and regulations (together with any
                       subsequent amendments) are hereby incorporated as an integral
                       part of this Scope of Service.

           5.          When a case has been relinquished or transferred to another
                       provider, the Provider must cease any contact with the Participant
                       and/or primary contact.


      F.        Staffing
        The Provider must adhere to the following provisions related to staffing:


           1.          Case Management Providers must employ Case Managers and
                       Case Management Supervisors. Sub-contracting arrangements
                       between Providers and individuals to provide case management
                       services are not permitted. Case Managers and Case
                       Management Supervisors must not be employed by multiple HCBS
                       Case Management Providers.

           2.          Case Management providers must employ a Supervisor(s) who
                       meets the qualifications of a Case Manager and who must provide
                       technical assistance, perform quality assurance, and provide
                       training to all Case Managers employed by the agency. Case
                       Management Supervisors must attend and complete initial HCBS
                       training for supervisors and pass a competency exam prior to
                       assuming supervisory duties. A Case Management Supervisor who
                       previously served as a HCBS Case Manager may request an
                       exemption. Supervisors must also attend ongoing training as
                       presented by SCDHHS.

           3.          Requirements for ratio of Case Management Supervisors to
                       Participants and/or Case Managers are published in the Help
                       section of Phoenix.

                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Manual                                                         July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                              Case Management Services

         4.       The Provider must ensure that Case Managers and Case
                  Management Supervisors do not have a felony conviction of any
                  kind. A SLED background check must be completed and
                  maintained in the personnel record for all case managers and
                  Case Management Supervisors and made available to LTSS upon
                  request. A new SLED background check must be obtained every
                  five years. Hiring of employees with misdemeanor convictions must
                  be at the discretion of the Provider.

         5.       The provider must check the OIG exclusions lists for all staff prior
                  to hire then at least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search
                  results page must be maintained in each employee’s personnel
                  file. Anyone on the OIG Registry is not allowed to provide services
                  to waiver participants or participate in any Medicaid funded
                  programs. The website addresses are listed below:

                  OIG Exclusions List: https://exclusions.oig.hhs.gov/

         6.       The Provider must ensure that each Case Manager and Case
                  Manager Supervisor has a current, valid driver's license. The
                  Provider must obtain a copy of the Case Manager’s driving
                  record and verify that the license is valid at the time of hiring and
                  then again every five years. Copies of the driving records must be
                  maintained in the employee’s file and provided to SCDHHS upon
                  request.

         7.       The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers and Case
                  Management Supervisors have demonstrated skills in computer
                  hardware/software access and usage.

         8.       The Provider must ensure that, when serving Participants, its Case
                  Managers and Case Management Supervisors display a photo
                  identification badge identifying the Provider and the employee.

         9.       The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers record a voice
                  mail greeting that clearly identifies the name of the Case Manager
                  and the Provider.

         10.      The Provider must ensure that Case Management activities are
                  conducted by one of the following:

               a. Social Workers licensed by the South Carolina Board of Social Work
                  Examiners,

               b. Individuals with a bachelor’s or master’s degree in a health or human
                  services field from an accredited college or university, who have at least
                  two (2) years of assessment and care planning experience with
                  participants (experience cannot include more than six (6) months of
                  internship),

               c. Registered nurses currently licensed by the S.C. State Board of Nursing,
                  or by an appropriate licensing authority of the state in which the provider

                                South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                    Case Management Services

                        is located for an out-of-state provider,

                   d. Certified Geriatric Care Managers with two (2) years of assessment and
                      care planning experience with participants,

                   e. Certified Case Managers with two (2) years of assessment and care
                      planning experience with participants. All Case Managers who have
                      professional licenses must comply with the continuing education
                      requirements necessary for their specific licensure,

                   f.   Any Case Managers/Supervisors who do not have professional licenses
                        must have a minimum of ten (10) hours relevant in-service training per
                        calendar year. The annual ten-hour requirement must be on a pro-rated
                        basis during the first year of employment. Documentation of training must
                        include topic, name and title of trainer, training objectives, and outline of
                        content and length of training, location, and outcome of training. Topics
                        for specific in- service training may be mandated by SCDHHS.

                   g. The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers and Case
                      Management Supervisors are aware that they are mandated reporters of
                      Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation (ANE). Failure to report ANE will result in
                      immediate action up to and including termination of serving HCBS
                      participants and the Case Manager/Supervisor being reported to the
                      appropriate authority.

           11.          PPD Tuberculin Test

                        Please refer to the Department of Public Health (DPH) website for
                        PPD Tuberculin test requirements.

                        https://dph.sc.gov/sites/scdph/files/Library/Regulations/R.61-
                        122.pdf

                        If Provider requires additional information, Provider must contact
                        the Tuberculosis Control Division, Department of Public Health,
                        1751 Calhoun Street, Columbia, SC 29201, phone (803) 898-
                        0558.


           12.          Personnel folders: Individual records must be maintained to
                        document that each member of the staff has met the above
                        requirements. When requested by SCDHHS, documents must be
                        uploaded to Phoenix.


      G.         Case Management Training
           1.           Case Management Providers will be responsible for training
                        employees as required by SCDHHS. This training must be in
                        conjunction with any training directly provided by SCDHHS.

           2.           Case Management providers will be responsible for training costs

                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 8
HCBS Provider Manual                                                           July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                Case Management Services

                    and attending training required by SCDHHS. SCDHHS will not
                    reimburse expenses for Case Managers, Case Management
                    Supervisors, or other Provider staff associated with attending
                    required SCDHHS training.

           3.       All new Case Managers and Case Management Supervisors must
                    complete the SCDHHS HCBS Training curriculum to include home
                    visits with SCDHHS staff.

           4.       Case Managers and Case Management Supervisors must obtain
                    passing scores on all tests administered by SCDHHS. Case
                    Managers and Case Management Supervisors who do not obtain
                    a passing score on any test given during SCDHHS initial training
                    must not be assigned any cases and must repeat the training and
                    retake any required tests.

                    If he/she fails on the second attempt, he/she must not be allowed
                    to provide case management for HCBS participants. If a Case
                    Management Supervisor does not pass the required tests, he/she
                    cannot be designated nor act as a supervisor.

           5.       After passing all initial tests and attending HCBS Area Office(s)
                    orientation, Case Managers and Case Management Supervisors
                    must be eligible to be assigned cases based on participant choice.
                    Case Managers and Case Management Supervisors must take an
                    additional competency test after having cases for ninety (90) days.
                    If the Case Manager or Case Management Supervisor fails this
                    test, he/she will be allowed to retake it once. If he/she fails on the
                    second attempt, he/she must not be allowed to provide case
                    management services to HCBS participants.

           6.       The types and number of Case assignments during the first ninety
                    (90) days must be coordinated with a regional trainer to ensure
                    adequate case coverage, with no assignments of re-evaluations to
                    any new employee without prior approval. Caseloads may not
                    exceed approved levels during the training cycle.

           7.       The Provider must ensure that its Case Managers and Case
                    Management Supervisors have business cards available to give to
                    Participants no later than their first scheduled home visit after
                    completion of training and on an ongoing basis thereafter.

           8.       The Provider must ensure that any of its Case Managers or Case
                    Management Supervisors who are identified by quality reviews as
                    needing remedial training attend that training and obtain passing
                    scores on all required competency tests.




      H.        Compliance


                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 9
HCBS Provider Manual                                                           July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                Case Management Services

              Quality Assurance and case management reviews are performed randomly
              and when failures to comply with contract or scope requirements are
              detected. SCDHHS can also conduct unscheduled compliance visits
              during regular office hours.
            Following is the sanction process for Case Management Providers that will
            apply when minimum standards as set forth by SCDHHS are not adhered
            to by Providers and Case Managers. SCDHHS will review the provider’s
            compliance with Case Management program requirements on an ongoing
            basis. Failure to comply with the program requirements will result in the
            application of sanctions against the Provider, Case Manager, and/or Case
            Management Supervisor to include but not limited to the following:
         1.          Strike: Case Managers and Case Management Supervisors will
                     receive strikes for actions that are out of compliance with policy.
                     Case Managers and Case Management Supervisors can receive
                     up to six (6) strikes per year. After the sixth strike,
                     recoupment will occur for any additional instances of non-
                     compliance. All Strikes are removed annually on the Case
                     Manager’s hire date.

         2.          Plan of Correction: The Provider will be required to submit a Plan
                     of Correction outlining the deficiency(ies), the detailed plan to
                     correct the deficiency(ies) and the effective date the plan will be
                     implemented.

         3.          Recoupment: Case Management services that have been billed
                     but are out of compliance with policy and procedures may be
                     recouped from the Provider.

         4.          Caseload reductions: The caseload of the Case Manager or Case
                     Management Supervisor will be reduced by a minimum of 10
                     percent (10%) for a minimum of ninety

         5.          (90) days. Case managers and Case Management Supervisors
                     must comply with Plan of Correction before any cases are
                     reassigned.

         6.          At its discretion, SCDHHS may require that a Provider’s Case
                     Manager or Case Management Supervisor no longer work with
                     HCBS Participants.

         7.          Suspension: The Case Management provider is removed from the
                     provider choice list for the duration of the sanction. The minimum
                     period of suspension is one (1) month. Providers who are
                     suspended must complete an acceptable Plan of Correction before
                     the suspension is lifted. Suspension must be for all geographic
                     areas the Provider covers.

         8.          Termination: The cancellation of the Provider’s enrollment in the
                     Medicaid HCBS program resulting in the denial of Medicaid
                     participation for a period of three (3) years. After two (2)
                     suspensions for any reason, a third suspension in a two (2) year

                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 10
HCBS Provider Manual                                                             July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                  Case Management Services

                      period will result in termination. Termination must also occur if the
                      provider is substantially out of compliance with contractual
                      requirements. See compliance guideline sheet for specifics on
                      sanctions based on Provider/Case Manager actions.


      I.         Administrative Requirements
           1.         The Provider must use the Phoenix system to enter a list of
                      regularly scheduled holidays, on which it will not be required to
                      furnish services. The Provider must not be closed for more than
                      two (2) consecutive days, except when a holiday falls in
                      conjunction with a weekend. If a holiday falls in conjunction with a
                      weekend, the Provider may be closed for not more than four (4)
                      consecutive days.

           2.        The Provider must specify in Phoenix’s Provider Portal the hours of
                     operation.

           3.        The Provider must maintain an up-to-date organizational chart that
                     is available to each employee.

           4.        The Provider must maintain written bylaws or the equivalent for
                     governing the Provider's operations.

           5.        The Provider must maintain a written employee handbook that
                     contains a Fragrance

           6.        -Free Policy and a dress code requiring business casual attire
                     when conducting SCDHHS business.

           7.        The Provider must assure SCDHHS that a governing body or
                     person(s) so functioning shall assume full legal authority for the
                     operation of the provider agency.

           8.        The Provider shall acquire and maintain, during the life of the
                     contract, general liability insurance and worker's compensation
                     insurance as required in the SCDHHS contract. The Provider is
                     required to list SCDHHS-HCBS as certificate holder for notice
                     purposes on all insurance policies using the following address:
                     Post Office Box 8206, Columbia, SC 29202-8206.

           9.        Upon request by SCDHHS, the Provider must be responsible for
                     appropriate participation in the SCDHHS Appeals and Hearings
                     process with respect to appeals of any action involving the
                     Provider.

           10.       The Provider must disclose to SCDHHS the names and
                     relationships of any relatives of the Provider or its staff who
                     provide items or services to Medicaid Participants. For purposes
                     of this Contract, the Provider means all owners, partners,
                     managing employees, directors and any other person involved in

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 11
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                   Case Management Services

                      the direct management and/or control of the business of the
                      Provider. The Provider’s staff includes everyone who works for or
                      with the Provider, including independent contractors, in the
                      provision of or billing for services described in this Contract.
                      Relative means persons connected to the Provider by blood or
                      marriage.

                      The Provider must disclose all such relationships via email to
                      provider- distribution@scdhhs.gov within two (2) days of learning
                      of the relationship. The Provider, in executing this Contract,
                      certifies that it has in place policies, procedures or other
                      mechanisms acceptable to SCDHHS to identify and report these
                      relationships. Failure to report a relationship timely or to have
                      the appropriate policies and procedures in place may result in
                      sanctions by SCDHHS up to and including termination of this
                      Contract for cause.

           11.        The Provider is subject to recoupment for payment made for all
                      waiver services as a result of authorizations issued by provider
                      staff not consistent with HCBS policies and procedures and in
                      accordance with the HCBS Case Management Recoupment
                      Guidelines.


      J.         HCBS Case Management Recoupment Guidelines
           1.         Late Level of Care/Re-evaluation (without an approved reason)

                   a. If late, recoup for every month late from appropriate entity

                   b. If completed within the month but out of compliance, recoup for the month


           2.         No Case Activity or Inappropriate Case Activity

                   a. Recoup if CM service has been billed but record reflects no case activity

                   b. No required monthly activity and not billed- strike

                   c. Quarterly due, Monthly Contact done - recoup for each month quarterly not
                      done, unless a valid reason is narrated.

                   d. Late Initial Visit-recoup unless a valid reason is narrated

                   e. If the narrative & checklist are incomplete, the CM must be considered out
                      of compliance- strike for each incident.

           3.         Closed Cases

                   a. Recoup if cases are not closed timely and properly (including terminating
                      the application). Potential to recoup for all waiver services that must have
                      been terminated.

                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 12
HCBS Provider Manual                                                            July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                 Case Management Services

                 b. Strike for failure to notify provider by phone and in writing of
                    authorization terminations. (Phone notification must be documented in the
                    narrative.)

         4.          Timeliness

                 a. Strike then recoups if documentation is more than three (3) days late.

                 b. Recoup for late Service Plan or blank Service Plan. Recoup for each
                    month Service Plan not completed.


         5.          Infractions of CM Activities

                 a. Recoup for CM service if personal goals are not discussed or addressed.

                 b. Recoup for CM service if Service Plan agreement form is not signed.

                 c. Recoup for CM service if Emergency Disaster plans and/or priorities are
                    not completed.

                 d. Strike, recoup or sanction if other infractions are noted, valid and
                    determined by Central Office to be out of compliance with P&P
                    guidelines, CM Scope requirements or Care Call guidelines (i.e., failure to
                    follow-up and document monthly with APS staff).

         6.          Monitoring Adult Protective Services (APS) cases

                 a. 1st Offense: SCDHHS QA will send a reminder to CM, Provider agency,
                     and Area Office.

                 b. 2nd Offense: SCDHHS QA will send a letter to CM & Provider Agency
                     notifying CM/Provider agency has five (5) business days from the date of
                     the letter to document service coordination/follow up with APS staff.

                 c. 3rd offense: CM/Provider agency will not receive new referrals for a
                    minimum of sixty (60) days.

         7.          Incorrect use of the Electronic Verification Visit System

                 a. Strike when worker forgets to check in but does check out.

                 b. Strike when worker forgets to check out but does check in.

                 c. Strike when worker forgets to check in and worker forgets to check out.

                 d. Recoup for any unauthorized location/phone numbers that are not
                    justifiable.

                 e. Strike when resolutions are submitted late.

              NOTE: New case managers have a ninety (90) day grace period after
              care call registration date except for late LOC/re-evaluations which must

                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 13
HCBS Provider Manual                                                          July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                               Case Management Services

            follow #1 above.

            All strikes must be accumulated to a total of six. All occurrences after the
            sixth strike are subject to recoupment (if applicable) and/or the
            Sanctioning Guidelines defined in the Scope of Service. After one year,
            each worker begins a new strike period. This means that the six-strike
            policy is an annual policy rather than a lifetime policy. For new workers,
            the annual date begins on the worker start date keyed in the worker
            registration section of Phoenix. The worker start date must always be the
            first day the worker serves a participant to receive the full 90-day grace
            period.




                                South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 14
