HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                 Companion (Agency) Services

        MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF SERVICES
                                   FOR
                     COMPANION (AGENCY) SERVICES

  A.    Objectives
        The objectives of Companion services are to provide short-term relief for
        caregivers and to provide needed supervision of Medicaid HCBS waiver
        participants.


  B.    Conditions of Participation
        1.     Agencies must utilize the automated systems mandated by SCDHHS to
               document and bill for the provision of services.
        2.     Pursuant to enactment and implementation of S.C. § Code 44-70-10 all
               providers of in-home care require a license to provide in-home care.
               Providers are required to renew their license annually. Providers who do
               not maintain their In- Home Care provider license will be terminated.
               Providers who are not licensed by the South Carolina Department of
               Public Health are not allowed to enroll as a Medicaid provider for these
               services. If the provider loses their SCDPH In- Home Care License for any
               reason, the provider must voluntarily terminate their HCBS services contract
               with SCDHHS immediately. With voluntary termination, the provider will be
               able to re-contract once required documentation is obtained and provided
               to SCDHHS. If there is an involuntary termination due to lack of licensing,
               the provider must wait 6 months prior to reapplying for the LTSSSCDHHS
               Contract.
        3.     Provider agencies must be housed in an office that is in a commercial or
               un-zoned area.
        4.     The Provider must ensure that, when serving Participants, its Companions
               and Supervisors display a photo identification badge identifying the
               Provider and the employee.
        5.     Providers must accept or decline referrals from LTSS within two (2)
               working days. Failure to respond must result in the loss of the referral.
        6.     The provider is responsible for verifying the participant’s Medicaid eligibility
               when it has accepted a referral and monthly thereafter to ensure continued
               eligibility. Providers can verify Medicaid eligibility for LTSS participants in
               the Phoenix Provider Portal on their dashboard. Providers must also refer
               to Provider Administrative and Billing Manual for additional information on
               eligibility determination.
        7.     Providers may use paperless filing systems. Provider must obtain approval
               from SCDHHS by emailing provider-distribution@scdhhs.gov prior to

                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                 Companion (Agency) Services

               initiating electronic documentation and/or filing systems. Electronic records
               must be made available upon request, and providers must have a reliable
               back-up system in the event their computer system shuts down.


  C.    Description of Services to be provided
        1.     The unit of service is one (1) hour of services provided in the participant's
               residence or away from the participant’s residence for shopping, laundry
               services, other offsite services or escort services. The amount of time
               authorized does not include the companion’s transportation time to and
               from the participant’s residence.
        2.     The number of units and services provided to each participant is
               dependent upon the participant's needs as set forth in the participant's
               Service Plan.
        3.     Services to be provided include:

                    a. Socialization - Reading, conversation, assistance with mail and
                       other interaction with participant as appropriate

                    b. Assistance with or supervision of meal/snack preparation

                    c. Assistance with or supervision of participant laundry (washing clothes and
                       linens)

                    d. Assistance with or supervision of participant’s shopping

                    e. Incidental light housekeeping (dusting, sweeping or other light
                       chores to maintain participant in a safe clean environment)

                    f. Sitting service focusing on the participant including supervision,
                       orientation, making appropriate contact in case of emergency


  D.    Staffing

        The Provider must maintain individual records for all employees. All required
        documentation indicated in this section must be filed in the personnel record no
        less than fifteen (15) days after employment.

        1.     The Provider must maintain the following (supervisory positions may be sub-
               contracted):
                    a. A supervisor who meets the following requirements:
                           i. High school diploma or equivalent.
                            ii. Capable of evaluating companions in terms of their ability
                                    to carry out assigned duties and their ability to relate

                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                   July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                      Companion (Agency) Services

                                        to the participant; and
                                iii. Able to assume responsibility for in-service training for companions.
                  b. Companions who meet the following minimum qualifications:
                       i.         Able to read, write and communicate effectively with
                                  participant and supervisor.
                       ii.        Able to use the Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System.
                       iii.       Capable of following a care plan with minimal supervision; and

                       iv.       At least eighteen (18) years of age.

                        v.        Companions must complete four (4) hours of relevant
                                  in-service training per calendar year in the following
                                  areas:
                        vi.       Maintaining a safe, clean environment and utilizing
                                  proper infection control techniques.

                        vii.      Following written instructions.

                        viii.     Ethics and interpersonal relationships.

                                ix. Documenting services provided; and

                                x. Other areas of training as appropriate.

              The annual four-hour requirement will be pro-rated during the
              companion’s first year of employment.

        2.    Agency staff may be related to participants served by the agency within
              limits allowed by the South Carolina Family Caregiver Policy. The following
              family members cannot be a paid caregiver:

                  a. The spouse of a Medicaid participant (including married but separated)

                  b. A parent of a minor Medicaid participant

                  c. A stepparent of a minor Medicaid participant

                  d. A foster parent of a minor Medicaid participant

                  e. Any other legally responsible adult or legal guardian of a Medicaid
                         participant
               Family members who are primary caregivers will not be reimbursed for
              companion services. All other qualified family members can be reimbursed
              for their provision of companion services

                                          South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                 Companion (Agency) Services

        3.    PPD Tuberculin Test
              Please refer to the Department of Public Health (DPH) website for PPD
              Tuberculin test requirements.
              https://scdhec.gov/sites/default/files/media/document/R.61-122.pdf


              For additional information, providers must contact the Tuberculosis Control
              Division, Department of Public Health, 1751 Calhoun Street, Columbia, SC
              29201, phone (803) 898-0558.
        4.    A SLED criminal background check is required for all employees prior to
              hire and at least every two years thereafter to include employees who
              provide direct care to HCBS participants and all administrative/office
              employees (office employees required to have SLED background checks
              include: administrator, office manager, supervisor, and persons named on
              organizational chart in management positions). All SLED criminal
              background checks must include all data for the individual. The SLED
              criminal background check must include statewide (South Carolina) data.
              The statewide data must include South Carolina and any other state or
              states the worker has resided in within the prior ten years. Potential
              employees must not have prior convictions or have pled no contest (nolo
              contendere) to crimes related to theft, abuse, neglect or mistreatment, or a
              criminal offense similar in nature to the crimes listed in S.C. Code Section
              43-35-10 et seq. Potential employees with non-violent felonies dating back
              ten (10) or more years can provide services to HCBS participants under
              the following circumstances:
                  •    Participant/responsible party must be notified of the aide’s SLED
                       criminal background, and

                  •    Documentation must be placed in the participant’s record and
                       signed by the participant/responsible party acknowledging
                       awareness of the aide’s SLED criminal background and agreement
                       to have the aide provide care.
              Potential administrative/office employees with non-violent felony
              convictions dating back ten (10) or more years can work in the agency at
              the Provider’s discretion.
              Hiring of employees with misdemeanor convictions is at the Provider’s discretion.
       5.      The provider must check the CNA registry for all staff prior to hire and at
               least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search results page must
               be maintained in each employee’s personnel file. Anyone on the CNA
               Registry with a revoked license is not allowed to provide services to
               waiver participants or participate in any Medicaid funded programs. The
               website addresses are listed below:
                  CNA Registry: https://cna365.examroom.ai/registry/?StateCode=SC


                                     South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                 Companion (Agency) Services

       6.     The provider must check the OIG exclusions lists for all staff prior to hire
              then at least every two years thereafter. A copy of the search results page
              must be maintained in each employee’s personnel file. Anyone on the OIG
              Registry is not allowed to provide services to waiver participants or
              participate in any Medicaid funded programs. The website addresses are
              listed below:

                   OIG Exclusions List: https://exclusions.oig.hhs.gov/

       7.     All required staff documentation must be filed in the employee file within 15
              days of employment or of receipt.

  E.    Conduct of Service

        The Provider must maintain documentation showing that it has complied with the
        requirements of this section.
            1. The Provider must obtain the Service Plan and/or OIDD Assessment from
               the case manager prior to the provision of services. The authorization must
               designate the amount, frequency and duration of service for participants in
               accordance with the participant's Service Plan/OIDD Assessment which
               must have been developed in consultation with the participant and others
               involved in the participant's care. The provider must receive new
               authorizations only when there is a change to the authorized service. The
               Provider must adhere to those duties which are specified in the authorization
               in developing the provider task list. The provider task list must be
               developed by the supervisor. If the provider identifies Companion duties
               that would be beneficial to the participant's care but are not specified in the
               authorization, the Provider must contact the case manager to discuss the
               possibility of having these duties included in the Authorization. Under no
               circumstances will any type of skilled medical service or hands on
               care be performed by a companion. The case manager must make the
               decision as to whether the Service Plan/OIDD Assessment must be
               amended to include the additional duty. This documentation must be
               maintained in the participant files.
            2. The supervisor of Companion services must:

                    a. Perform an initial visit to the participant’s home within 90 days of the
                       start of services and provide on-site supervision at least once every
                       365 days thereafter for each participant and phone contact with the
                       participant or responsible party as needed.
                               i. At the initial supervisory visit, the supervisor must inform
                                  participants of their right to complain about the quality of
                                  Companion services provided and must give participants
                                  information about how to register a complaint. The
                                  complaint information must contain at a minimum, the
                                  name of the person(s) to whom the complaint must be
                                  made, that persons’ telephone number(s) and

                                      South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                   Companion (Agency) Services

                                   address(es). First point of contact must be a person
                                   employed by the provider. The second point of contact
                                   must be any related licensing agency (DPH, LLR,
                                   etc.)must. The participant is required to sign and date a
                                   statement that they have received this information. The
                                   supervisor is also required to sign and date this
                                   statement. Complaints which are made against
                                   companions must be investigated by the Provider. All
                                   complaints which are to be investigated must be referred
                                   to the supervisor who must take any appropriate action.
                                ii. At the initial supervisory visit and periodically thereafter,
                                    the supervisor must give the participant written
                                    information regarding advanced directives; the
                                    participant is required to sign and date a statement that
                                    they have received this information; the supervisor is
                                    also required to sign and date the statement.
              b.        Each supervisory visit, including the initial visit, must be
                        documented in the participant's file and recorded in the Electronic
                        Visit Verification (EVV) System. In the event the participant is
                        inaccessible during the time the visit would have normally been
                        made, the visit must be completed within five (5) working days of
                        the resumption of Companion services.
              c.        The Supervisor's report of the on-site visits must include, at a
                        minimum:

                       i.      Documentation that services are being delivered
                               consistent with the Service Plan/Authorization;

                       ii.     Documentation that the participant's needs are being met;

                       iii.    Reference to any complaints which the participant
                               or family member/responsible party has lodged; and,

                       iv.     A brief statement regarding any changes in the
                               participant's service needs.
              d.        Supervisors must provide assistance to companions as necessary.
              e.        Supervisors must be immediately accessible by phone during any
                        hours services are being provided under this contract. If the
                        supervisor position becomes vacant, SCDHHS must be notified
                        within two (2) business days.
               f.      If there is a break in service which lasts more than sixty (60) days,
                       the supervisor must conduct a visit within ninety (90) days of the
                       resumption of services.


                                       South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                     July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                        Companion (Agency) Services

            3. In addition, the Provider must maintain an individual participant record that
               documents the following items:
                   a.   The Provider must initiate Companion services on the date agreed
                        upon by the Case Manager, provider, and participant indicated on
                        the authorization. Services must not be provided prior to the
                        authorized start date and must be provided according to the
                        schedule as indicated on the authorization.

                   b.   The Provider must notify the CM within two (2) working days of the
                        following participant changes:
                        i.          Participant's condition has changed, and the Service
                                    Plan/Authorization no longer meets participant's needs, or
                                    the participant no longer appears to need Companion
                                    services.
                        ii.         Participant dies, is institutionalized, or moves out of the service area.
                        iii.        Participant no longer wishes to participate in a program of
                                    Companion services

                        iv.         Provider becomes aware of the participant's Medicaid
                                    ineligibility or potential ineligibility.

                   c.   The Provider must maintain a record-keeping system which
                        documents the delivery of services in accordance with the
                        Service Plan. The Provider shall not ask the
                        participant/responsible person to sign any log or task sheet. Task
                        sheets must be reviewed, signed, with original signature (rubber
                        signature stamps are not acceptable), and dated every two (2)
                        weeks by the supervisor. Task sheets must be filed in the
                        participant’s record within thirty (30) days of service delivery.
              d.        For OIDD participants: The delivery of services and units must be
                        provided in accordance with the OIDD Assessment. The provider
                        must maintain daily service logs containing the Companion services
                        provided for the participants and the actual amount of time
                        expended for the service.. Daily service logs must be reviewed,
                        signed, with original signature (rubber signature stamps are not
                        acceptable), and dated every two (2) weeks by the supervisor.
                        Daily logs must be filed in the participant’s record within thirty (30)
                        days of service delivery.
              e.        Daily service logs must be made available to SCDHHS/OIDD upon
                        request.
              f.        All active participant records must contain at least two (2) years of
                        documentation to include, , the following:
                               i.         task sheets/daily logs,


                                            South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                                  Companion (Agency) Services

                             ii.     service plans,
                             iii.    authorizations,
                             iv.     supervisory visit documentation
                             v.      right to complain documentation
                             vi.     advanced directive documentation and
                             vii.    any complaints, etc.
                         Per Medicaid policy all records must be retained for at least five (5)
                         years.
                g.      Whenever two consecutive attempted or missed visits occur, the
                        local Area office/OIDD office must be notified. An attempted visit is
                        when the companion arrives at the home and is unable to provide
                        the assigned tasks because the participant is not at home or
                        refuses services. A missed visit is when the provider is unable to
                        provide the authorized service. Missed visits must be documented
                        in the participant record as well as in the Electronic Visit
                        Verification (EVV) System.




     F.    Administrative Requirements
           1.        The Provider must inform SCDHHS of the provider’s organizational
                     structure, including the provider personnel with authority and
                     responsibility for employing qualified personnel, ensuring adequate
                     staff education, in-service training, and employee evaluations. The
                     Provider shall notify SCDHHS within three (3) working days in the
                     event of a change in or the extended absence of the personnel with the
                     above-mentioned authority.
           2.        The Provider must provide SCDHHS a written document showing the
                     organization administrative control and lines of authority for the
                     delegation of responsibility down to the hands-on participant care level
                     staff at contract implementation. The document must include an
                     organizational chart including names of those currently in the positions.
                     Revisions or modifications to this organizational document must be
                     provided to SCDHHS. It is recommended that this document be readily
                     accessible to all staff.
           3.        Administrative and supervisory functions shall not be delegated to
                     another organization.

           4.        The Provider shall acquire and maintain for the duration of the contract
                     liability insurance and workers’ compensation insurance as provided in
                     Article IX, Section D of the Contract. The Provider is required to list
                     SCDHHS as a Certificate Holder for informational purposes only on all

                                        South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 8
HCBS Provider Manual                                                          July 1, 2024
Scopes of Services                                             Companion (Agency) Services

                 insurance policies using the following address: Post Office Box 8206,
                 Columbia, SC 29202-8206.
                  Failure to maintain the required insurance will result in termination of
                  your contract with SCDHHS.
           5.    The Provider must develop and maintain a Policy and Procedure
                 Manual that describes how activities will be performed in accordance
                 with the terms of the requirements of the contract. The Policy and
                 Procedure Manual shall be available during office hours for the
                 guidance of the governing body, personnel and must be made
                 available to SCDHHS upon request.
           6.    The provider agency must ensure that key agency staff is accessible in
                 person or by telephone during normal business hours and during
                 compliance review audits conducted by SCDHHS and/or its agents.
                 Providers are required to keep documentation records, including
                 medical records, in chronological order.
           7.    The Provider shall update holidays in Phoenix; the Provider is not
                 required to furnish services on those days. The Companion provider
                 agency must not be closed for more than two (2) consecutive days at a
                 time, except when a holiday falls in conjunction with a weekend. If a
                 holiday falls in conjunction with a weekend, a Companion provider
                 agency may be closed for not more than four (4) consecutive days.




                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 9
