HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                      Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
          MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER SCOPE OF

                                      SERVICES FOR

            CHILDREN’S ATTENDANT CARE (SELF-
                       DIRECTED) *
  *Children’s Attendant Care is only available to Medically Complex Children (MCC) waiver
  participants aged one to 21 with extraordinary care needs.


  A.     Minimum Qualifications
       1. Children’s attendant caregivers must meet the following minimum
          qualifications:

           a. Demonstrate an ability to read, write and communicate with the participant,
              responsible party and/or Employer of Record (EOR).

                Exception: When the participant or responsible party is unable to
                identify a separate, qualified individual to serve as the EOR, the
                responsible party may be allowed to serve as the EOR and the
                children’s attendant caregiver. Exception requests must be submitted by
                the MCC Waiver Nurse Case Manager to WES@scdhhs.gov.

            b. Capable of aiding in activities of daily living; physically capable of
               performing duties which may require physical exertion such as
               lifting, transferring, etc. if necessary;

            c. Capable of completing the tasks identified for the participant on the waiver
               care plan with participant and/or EOR;

            d. Be at least 18 years of age;

            e. Capable of following billing procedures and completing required paperwork;

            f. Have no known conviction for any of the following:

               i.    abuse, neglect or exploitation of adults (as defined in the Omnibus
                     Adult Protection Act, S.C. Code Ann. Title 43, Chapter 35) or of
                     children (as defined in the Children’s Code, S.C. Code Ann. Title 63,
                     Chapter 7);any crime against another person;

               ii.   felony of any kind; Any crime concerning the misuse or abuse of public
                     assistance program (including, but not limited to, fraudulently obtaining
                     benefits, engaging in fraudulent billing practices, and embezzling or
                     otherwise misusing public assistance funds in any manner). No
                     exclusion for Medicare or Medicaid Programs;


                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 1
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                    Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
               iii. Any crime concerning the misuse or abuse of any public assistance
                    program (including, but not limited to, fraudulently obtaining benefits,
                    engaging in fraudulent billing practices, and embezzling or otherwise
                    misusing public assistance funds in any manner). No exclusion for
                    Medicare or Medicaid Programs;

              iv.   Upon request the attendant must provide references to the participant
                    and/or responsible party;

         g. Screening

            Prior to the children’s attendant caregivers’ Medicaid provider enrollment
            date, the attendant must provide evidence of having a single Blood Assay for
            Mycobacterium tuberculosis (BAMT) or a baseline two-step Tuberculin Skin
            Test in the following manner:

                    1. With a documented negative Tuberculin Skin Test or a BAMT
                       result within the previous twelve (12) months, the children’s
                       attendant caregiver may have a BAMT or a single Tuberculin Skin
                       Test, administered and read, to serve as the baseline prior to
                       provider enrollment.

                    2. Without a documented negative Tuberculin Skin Test or a BAMT
                       result within the previous twelve (12) months, the children’s
                       attendant caregiver shall have a BAMT or a two-step Tuberculin
                       Skin Test, administered and read, prior to Participant contact.

                        After known exposure to a person with potentially infectious
                        tuberculosis disease without the use of adequate personal
                        protection, the children’s attendant caregiver must ensure his or
                        her tuberculosis status is determined in a manner prescribed in the
                        current Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and SC
                        Department of Public Health tuberculosis guidelines. If TB is
                        present, the children’s attendant caregiver must report any known
                        or suspected cases of TB disease to the local SC Department of
                        Public Health’s Public Health Clinic. A listing is located here Public
                        Health Clinics | South Carolina Department of Public Health.

                    3. Annual TB Risk Assessment

                     Children’s attendant caregivers must submit a Health Care
                     Personnel (HCP) Baseline Individual TB Risk Assessment annually
                     to remain eligible to serve as a children’s attendant caregiver. Forty-
                     five (45) days prior to the expiration date of the annual risk
                     assessment, the University of South Carolina Center for Disability
                     Resources (USC-CDR) licensed nurse (USC nurse) must notify
                     active enrolled children’s attendant caregivers of the expiration of
                     their annual TB risk assessment. Children’s attendant caregivers
                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 2
HCBS Provider Manual                                                            July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                  Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
                   are considered at increased risk for TB if any of the statements on
                   the risk assessment are marked "Yes." Children’s Attendant
                   Caregivers determined on the assessment to be at risk for TB must
                   provide evidence of a single BAMT or a baseline two-step
                   Tuberculin Skin Test with the annual risk assessment. If the
                   children’s attendant caregiver does not submit the annual TB risk
                   assessment, the USC nurse must notify SCDHHS. Current services
                   of the children’s attendant caregiver must be terminated after
                   reasonable notice (two (2) weeks) to participants has been given so
                   participants can find replacement services. The HCBS Provider
                   Oversight must suspend new referrals to the children’s attendant
                   caregiver effective on the date suspension is submitted.


                           Please refer to the Department of Public Health (DPH) website for
                           PPD Tuberculin test requirements.

                           https://dph.sc.gov/sites/scdph/files/Library/Regulations/R.61-122.pdf
                           If additional information is required, contact the Tuberculosis Control
                           Division, Department of Public Health, 400 Otarre Parkway, Cayce,
                           SC 29033-3751 phone (803) 898-0558.

        2. Legally responsible individuals are allowed to receive payment for
           children’s attendant care services when the MCC waiver participant
           is determined to require extraordinary care.

          a.          Legally responsible individuals include the following family
                      members:

                i.       A parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

               ii.       A stepparent of a minor Medicaid participant;

               iii.      A foster parent of a minor Medicaid participant;

               iv.       A person who has the legal responsibility of utilizing their own
                         assets for the care of the Medicaid participant (legally
                         responsible adult)

           b. Extraordinary care exceeds the range of tasks a family member or
              responsible person would normally perform in the household for a
              person without a disability or chronic illness of the same age. The
              care is necessary to ensure the health and welfare of the
              participant and avoid institutionalization.

           c. Reimbursable children’s attendant care services are limited to
              those identified by the licensed professional on the SCDHHS
              Children’s In- Home Care Prescriber Form and must be rendered
              in the scope, frequency, and duration as identified and authorized
                                         South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 3
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                      Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
               on the service plan. Only authorized services rendered by an
               approved children’s attendant caregiver and confirmed by
               electronic visit verification (EVV) are eligible for reimbursement.


       3.     More than one enrolled children’s attendant caregiver may be
              authorized to provide the assessed number of hours of children’s
              attendant care to the MCC waiver participant. However, children’s
              attendant care services from each children’s attendant caregiver
              may not be provided at the same time.

       4.     When children’s attendant care services are authorized for more
              than one MCC participant in the same home the children’s attendant
              caregiver cannot be clocked in for both participants at the same time.
              The children’s attendant caregiver must clock in and out separately
              for each participant.

        5. Involuntary Termination

             a. Participants may be involuntarily terminated from the use of
                children’s attendant care services when they are unable to direct
                their own care and have no responsible party willing and/or able to
                do so. Participants who are involuntarily terminated from children’s
                attendant care services are given the option of receiving agency
                directed services provided by an in-home care agency.

             b. If a participant is involuntarily terminated from children’s attendant
                care services, the termination of the service and the authorization
                of in-home care agency services are coordinated to assure
                continuity of services. These safeguards exist to assure participant
                health and welfare during the transition period of an involuntary
                termination of children’s attendant care services.

             c. Participants who are involuntarily terminated from children’s
                attendant care services are given written appeal rights.


  B.        Minimum Training Requirements
            Prior to the provision of services children’s attendant caregivers must meet the
            following training requirements. The USC nurse will review documentation
            certifying completion of training by a SCDHHS-approved party. Copies of
            required training completion documents shall be maintained in the USC nurse
            file for each children’s attendant caregiver. Documentation must remain current
            in order to provide children’s attendant care services.

            1. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) Training


                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 4
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                      Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
             Completion of CPR training is required. Documentation must
             include training date, course title, location/modality, duration of
             training, name of children’s attendant caregiver, name of
             instructor/organization, and license if applicable. The
             documentation must be generated by an organization, or an
             individual delegated by an organization to provide the instruction.
             CPR recertification requirements may vary by the issuing authority.
             The American Red Cross CPR certification is valid for 2 years.

          2. First Aid Training

             Completion of First Aid training is required. Documentation must
             include training date, course title, location/modality, duration of
             training, name of children’s attendant caregiver, name of
             instructor/organization, and license if applicable. The
             documentation must be generated by an organization, or an
             individual delegated by an organization to provide the instruction.
             First Aid recertification requirements and the frequency vary by the
             issuing authority and the individual needs. The American Red
             Cross First Aid certification is valid for 2 years.

         3. Additional Skilled Care Training

            For any task that has been identified as a skilled need on the
            SCDHHS Children’s In-Home Care Prescriber Information Form,
            children’s attendant caregivers are required to demonstrate
            competency in performing the identified tasks. Only the tasks
            identified on the SCDHHS Children’s In-Home Care Prescriber
            Information Form will be added to the service plan. Enrolled
            children’s attendant caregivers are only reimbursed for services
            outlined in the service plan.

         4. Electronic Visit Verification System/Billing Training

            Prior to the first authorization being issued, all children’s attendant
            caregivers who have been matched with their first participant are
            required to complete Electronic Visit Verification (EVV)
            System/billing training.

          5. Participant-specific Training

             Participant-specific training for the children’s attendant caregiver and/or
             participant/ responsible party may be provided as deemed necessary based
             on the professional judgment of the USC nurse or when the
             participant/responsible party or children’s attendant caregiver requests
             assistance with training related to specific tasks.

             Note: Training may be furnished by the USC nurse while the children’s
             attendant caregiver is furnishing care to the participant. During the match
                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 5
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                    Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
             visit, the USC nurse may also identify additional training needs and assist the
             children’s attendant caregiver with locating a training resource to address
             those needs.

  C.     Employer of Record
          1. The provision of children's attendant care and the children's
             attendant caregiver must be supervised by the EOR to ensure that
             the employee (children’s attendant caregiver) provides services as
             outlined in the authorization. The EOR can be the participant (aged
             18 or older), responsible party, or other identified individual. The
             safety and efficacy of the EOR must be certified by the USC nurse.
             The USC nurse must determine when the EOR is no longer certified
             to provide supervision for the children’s attendant caregiver.

          2. The USC nurse and the MCC waiver nurse case manager must
             document when the requirement for an EOR cannot be met and is,
             therefore, waived. When the participant or responsible party is
             unable to identify a separate, qualified individual to serve as the
             EOR, the responsible party may be allowed to serve as the EOR
             and the children’s attendant caregiver. Requests for exceptions
             must be submitted by the MCC Waiver Nurse Case Manager to
             WES@scdhhs.gov. All the following conditions must be met:

              a. Participant is a minor.

               b. Participant is a minor and the legally responsible individual is
                  also the approved children’s attendant caregiver.

               c. The legally responsible individual / children’s attendant
                  caregiver is unable to identify a separate, qualified individual to
                  serve as the EOR.
  D.     Infection Control
         The children’s attendant caregiver must always adhere to basic infection
         control procedures while providing children’s attendant care services.

  E.     Description of Services to be Provided
         1. The number of children’s attendant care service hours are
            determined by the SCDHHS validated assessment for in-home
            personal care hours.

             a. For skilled care the Nursing Acuity Scale will be used to
                determine the assessed number of hours needed to meet the
                skilled needs identified on the SCDHHS Children’s In-Home Care
                Prescriber Information Form.

             b. For children under five refer to the Guidelines for Developmental
                Stages.
                                 South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 6
HCBS Provider Manual                                                             July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                   Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
             c. The assessor will compare the assessed skills on the Nursing
                 Acuity Scale to the needs on the Children’s In-Home Care
                 Prescriber Information Form to determine which tasks can be
                 delegated to the children’s attendant caregiver.

         2. The unit of service is authorized in one (1) hour increments and must
            consist of direct children’s attendant care services provided in the
            participant’s home. Escorting the participant to Medicaid covered
            services when transportation is provided by another individual is
            reimbursable.

              Exceptions: A secondary home setting may be identified as billable
              place of service for children’s attendant care services when
              approved. The MCC waiver nurse case manager must email
              WES@scdhhs.gov to request approval.

         3. The allowable tasks provided to the child are dependent upon the
            individual participant’s needs as set forth in the participant’s
            approved service plan. Services must be participant specific and for
            the direct benefit of the participant.

         4. If the assessed need for services exceeds 40 hours per week, every
            effort must be made to identify a separate children’s attendant
            caregiver to provide the services for over 40 hours per week. A week
            is defined as Sunday – Saturday.

              a. Children’s attendant caregivers may not provide more than 16
                 hours of care per day.

              b. Children’s attendant caregivers may not provide more than 40
                 hours of care per week.

          5. If multiple attendants are required, more than one attendant cannot
             be clocked into the EVV system at one time.

          6. If a children’s attendant caregiver is authorized to provide services for
             more than one participant, every effort must be made to ensure that
             the children’s attendant caregiver does not exceed 40 hours per
             week for the combined hours for all participants.

              Participants/Responsible parties may select an agency-based
              children’s personal care provider to provide coverage for a portion of
              the assessed hours. In this instance, the children’s personal care
              provider will be held to the service limitations identified in the
              Children’s Personal Care Scope of Services and associated billing
              guidelines.

         7. Children’s attendant care services include:
                                  South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 7
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                      Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)

                a. Extraordinary care which exceeds the range of tasks a family member or
                    responsible person would normally perform in the household for a
                    person without a disability or chronic illness of the same age which are
                    required to assist the participant with activities of daily living (e.g.,
                    assistance with bathing, dressing, eating, hygiene, mobility, toileting, and
                    transferring).


                b. Delegated skilled tasks specific to the participant’s medical condition(s).
                   Skilled tasks must be identified by the prescriber and documented on the
                   SCDHHS Children’s In-Home Care Prescriber Information Form. The
                   USC nurse must certify competency of the children’s attendant caregiver
                   to provide identified skills via a match visit in the participant’s home.

                c. Transportation is excluded from this service. The non-emergency
                   medical transportation (NEMT) program provides transportation to and
                   from Medicaid covered services.

                d. Escorting participant to Medicaid covered services.

                    Children’s attendant caregivers may be reimbursed for escorting the
                    participant to Medicaid covered services when transportation is
                    provided by another individual. The request must be communicated to
                    the MCC waiver nurse case manager and added to the participant’s
                    service plan. Children’s attendant caregivers are prohibited from
                    clocking in when care is not being rendered directly to the participant
                    (e.g. when children’s attendant caregiver is driving the participant to a
                    Medicaid covered service). Children’s attendant caregivers will not be
                    reimbursed for escorting participants other than described above.


   F.       Record Keeping
        1. The children’s attendant caregiver shall maintain a copy of the following and
           ensure information remains confidential per SCDHHS Healthy Connections
           Medicaid requirements for providers:

           a. Current and historical Service Provision Forms specifying units
              and services/duties to be provided;

           b. The HCBS participant’s service plan;

           c. The children’s attendant caregiver must enter the children’s attendant care
              corresponding activity code in the EVV system. These codes must be
              entered at the conclusion of the service.


                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 8
HCBS Provider Manual                                                              July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                    Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
          d. A copy of the participant’s back-up plan for service provision when the
             primary children’s attendant caregiver is unable to provide services. (The
             participant/responsible party must make prior arrangements with family
             members, other formal or informal supports or another enrolled children’s
             attendant caregiver for care provision in the absence of the primary children’s
             attendant caregiver).


       2. The MCC waiver nurse case manager shall monitor the children’s
          attendant care services in accordance with roles and
          responsibilities outlined in the executed Care Service Organization
          contract. The monitoring and oversight shall include the following:

          a. Monthly review of children’s attendant care EVV entries;

          b. Monthly documentation of oversight of the children’s attendant
             care services rendered to the participant in the Phoenix case
             management system;

          c. Completion of a quarterly face-to-face visit with the children’s attendant
             caregiver and the participant in the home; this visit may be completed in
             conjunction with the mandated quarterly care coordination/case management
             in-person visit.

             Note: MCC waiver nurse case manager must document the completion of
             this requirement with the initiation and completion of a children’s attendant
             care narrative entry in the Phoenix case management system.


  G.      Conduct of Services
       1. The children’s attendant caregiver must initiate children’s attendant
          care services on the date agreed upon by the participant/responsible
          party, children’s attendant caregiver, EOR and the MCC waiver nurse
          case manager. This date must be the start date on the written
          authorization for services. Services provided prior to the authorized
          start date as stated on the Service Provision Form will not be
          reimbursed.

       2. The MCC waiver nurse case manager must authorize children’s
          attendant care services by designating the authorized units of services
          in accordance with the participant’s service plan. The children’s
          attendant caregiver must provide services per the needs outlined in the
          service plan. The participant and/or responsible party must self-direct
          the provision of care and coordinate with the children’s attendant
          caregiver for the time for service delivery and specific tasks to be
          performed. If the children’s attendant caregiver does not reside with the
          participant, the amount of time authorized does not include
          transportation time to and from the participant’s home.
                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 9
HCBS Provider Manual                                                                  July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                        Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
          If the children’s attendant caregiver or the participant/responsible party identifies
          children’s attendant care duties that would be beneficial to the participant’s care
          but are not specified in the participant’s service plan, the children’s attendant
          caregiver or participant/responsible party must contact the MCC waiver nurse
          case manager to discuss the possibility of having these duties included in the
          service plan. The decision to modify the duties to be performed by the children’s
          attendant caregiver is the responsibility of the MCC waiver nurse case manager
          and may include collaboration with the licensed professional providing care to
          the child.
          a. The children’s attendant caregiver must notify the MCC waiver nurse
               case manager immediately of the following participant changes:

             i.     Participant’s condition has changed, and the service plan no longer
                    meets participant’s need, or the participant no longer appears to need
                    children’s attendant care services.

             ii.    Participant/responsible party no longer appears capable of
                    providing supervision for the children’s attendant caregiver.

             iii.   Participant/responsible party no longer wants to serve as
                    EOR/responsible party.

             iv.    Participant dies.

              v.    Participant moves out of the service area.

             vi.    Participant/responsible party no longer wishes to receive
                    children’s attendant care services.

            vii.    Knowledge of the participant’s Medicaid ineligibility or potential
                    ineligibility

           b. The children’s attendant caregiver, EOR and any other individual
              involved in the provision or oversight of the service must notify
              Child Protective Services (for MCC participants under 18 years of
              age) or Adult Protective Services (for MCC participants aged 18
              and older) if he/she has knowledge of, or reason to believe that the
              participant has been or is likely to be abused, neglected or
              exploited within 24 hours or the next business day of becoming
              aware/witnessing the event. If a report is made of abuse, neglect,
              or exploitation, the children’s attendant caregiver must notify the
              MCC waiver nurse case manager within 24 hours or the next
              business day of when the report is made.

           c. The participant must have an effective back-up service provision
              plan in place to ensure that the participant receives services in the
              absence of the primary children’s attendant caregiver.


                                    South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 10
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                     Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
           d. When the children’s attendant caregiver determines that services
              cannot be provided by the children’s attendant caregiver as
              authorized, the children’s attendant caregiver must immediately
              notify the MCC waiver nurse case manager and the
              participant/responsible party by telephone.

           e. When two consecutive attempted visits occur, the children’s
              attendant caregiver/participant/responsible party or EOR must
              notify the MCC waiver nurse immediately. An attempted visit
              occurs when the children’s attendant caregiver arrives at the home
              and is unable to provide the assigned tasks because the
              participant is not at home, or the service has been refused.

           f. The children’s attendant caregiver must notify the MCC waiver nurse
              case manager immediately if the children’s attendant caregiver
              wishes to terminate as the provider.

              When applicable, during the match visit the USC nurse is responsible
              for giving participants a written description of the state law
              concerning advance directives in accordance with the Patient Self-
              Determination Act. The USC nurse must assist children’s attendant
              caregivers in meeting this requirement.

           g. The children’s attendant caregiver shall adhere to all SCDHHS
              policies, procedures and Medicaid provider manuals including
              policies regarding billing, claims adjustments, financial
              management services vendor requirements, etc.

           h. The children’s attendant caregiver must comply with all
              Electronic Visit Verification (EVV) System requirements for all
              participants.

  H.      Skilled Services Provided by an Approved Children’s Attendant
          Caregiver
       The waiver service definition for children’s attendant care allows a participant or
       the designee to self-direct “skilled service activities” performed by the children’s
       attendant caregiver with approval from the participant’s prescriber. These
       activities are basic and ancillary services that enable an individual in need of in-
       home care to live in the individual's home and community rather than in an
       institution and to carry out functions of daily living. With prescriber’s approval,
       children’s attendant caregivers may provide skilled services which are considered
       basic and ancillary care for participants in the MCC waiver.

       When a referral is made to the USC nurse for children’s attendant care that
       includes a request to provide skilled service activities, the MCC waiver nurse case
       manager must include a comment on the referral stating “Participant/responsible
       party has requested a skilled service to be provided.”
                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 11
HCBS Provider Manual                                                               July 1, 2025
Scopes of Services                                     Children’s Attendant Care (Self-Directed)
      For existing referrals already in process with the USC nurse where a skilled service
      need has been identified, the MCC waiver nurse case manager must note in the
      comment section on the referral, “Participant/responsible party has requested a
      skilled service to be provided” AND email the USC nurse to notify them of the
      change in the referral. The USC nurse will not receive a Phoenix notification that
      there is a change to the referral.

      The USC nurse will notify the assigned MCC waiver nurse case manager when the
      “SCDHHS Children’s In-Home Care Prescriber Information Form” can be sent to
      the prescriber completion including signature.

      Once the signed Children’s In-Home Prescriber Information Form has been
      received, the MCC waiver nurse case manager must scan the form into Phoenix
      scans under the children’s attendant caregiver scan tag and email the USC nurse
      to notify the form has been returned and scanned. The USC nurse must complete
      the children’s attendant caregiver match visit once this notification is received by
      email.

      The following list of services are examples of activities which may be appropriate
      for the children’s attendant caregiver to perform. This list is not all inclusive.

  •   Tracheostomy care
  •   Ventilator Care - taking on and off the vent
  •   Suctioning- tracheostomy/ oral
  •   Finger stick blood glucose monitoring
  •   Wound care
  •   Enteral feedings (PEG or Nasogastric)
  •   Bowel program
  •   Ostomy care
  •   Catheter care

      Only skills on the Children’s In-Home Care Prescriber Information Form can be
      rendered by the approved children’s attendant caregiver and reimbursed by
      SCDHHS.

       NOTE: If the participant changes physician, nurse practitioner, or physician
       assistant and the prescriber who signed the Children’s In-Home Prescriber
       Information Form is no longer involved in the participant’s care, a new Children’s
       In-Home Prescriber Information Form is required.
  If the service is directed by the EOR, and the EOR is no longer able to direct the skilled
  service activities performed by the children’s attendant caregiver, a new Children’s In-
  Home Care Prescriber Information Form statement is required.




                                   South Carolina Department of Health and Human Services 12
