AuthentiCare Mobile Work Flow for visit with no data
connection
Shows how to order a Q/R card when checking in.

User does initial login for the day in a location with data connection and sees
the following:
User goes to the home where there is no data connection and logs in again
when the user gets there. The following page displays with the red banner:
The red banner means there is no data connection to the phone. The user taps
the manual check in button and goes to the page below:
Since the client does not have a Q/R card, the worker clicks on the “ID not
available” button, and goes to the page below. The worker enters the CLTC
number of the client and the service the worker plans to perform. To request a
Q/R card, the worker simply checks the box below the service selection. That is
ALL there is to ordering a Q/R card – just check the box and hit submit check in.
Since there is no data connection, the check in AND the Q/R card order are
queued on the page below. Note that the client name is NOT displayed because
the app does not have a data connection to look it up and determine if the
worker is allowed to see it. So the worker sees the CLTC number the worker
typed in. When the worker finishes the visit, the worker hits the check out
button.
The worker is taken to a page where the worker can select activities and
observations and submit their checkout.
Then the checkout is queued on the phone:
At any time, including after checking in or after checking out, the user can touch
the AuthentiCare button (the one with the cross) and return to the visits page.
Note in this example, the user still does not have a data connection so the check
in, check out, and Q/R card order are all still queued.
When the user returns to an area with a data connection, the visits still show as
queued until they transmit to the Care Call system. But since the user has a
data connection, the banner is white. In Android this page does not
automatically refresh the status. One way to refresh is for users to touch the
manual check in button and then immediately touch the AuthentiCare button at
the upper left to cancel out and return to this page.
When the visits have been sent to Care Call, they will be in completed status as
shown below. Note that to limit data usage, the checkout push process waits
two minutes to retry if the initial push fails. So the user may have to wait a few
minutes and refresh the screen a few times if the data connection is weak.
