                                         Mobile Application
                          Questions and Answers from March 2016 Webinars


Device ID – Installing the App
    1. Where do you get the device ID and when in the process do you go for it?
    2. How do you find device ID?
    3. I have several employees - I've been able to download the app with no problem. But the
       Device ID doesn't come up when we press the MENU button.
    4. Having trouble once I get to the point of logging in with a worker ID and a password. On
       my current device I am having trouble trying to find my device ID. I do not have a menu
       option on my phone and I cannot find it within my settings.
    5. I have 2 employees that will not display the Device ID. These are Samsung / Android
       phones. The app is there, but I CANNOT see the Device ID at all.
    6. What if you can’t find device ID?
    7. Just to confirm all android phones will have a menu button to be able to retrieve the
       device id?? This has been frustrating trying to fine the device id on some android
       phones since the IMEI number doesn't match the device id number.

                IPhones only display the device ID when the app is downloaded. Once the app
                is downloaded, there is no way to go back and retrieve a device id without
                downloading the app again.
                The device ID can be found on Android phones once the app has been
                download. To retrieve the device ID, select the “menu” button while the app is
                visible on the screen. When the menu button is successfully selected, the
                device ID will display at the bottom of the screen. How the menu button is
                viewed and accessed is different for different phones. You may need to consult
                your phone’s manual to determine how to access the menu button. For some
                Android phones, you may also be able to find the device ID by going to “settings”
                and “about phone”.


Phone Requirements
    8. How do you know if the phone (Android) is 4.4 or higher?
             To find out the phone version, you will need to go to “settings” then “about
             phone”.

    9. I have participants who do not have a "traditional Land Line". They are using traditional
       phone but are using a mobile phone company for phone service. Is this considered a
       land line or cell?
               If “home phone service” is provided by a mobile company, the home phone is
               considered a landline phone. If a “cordless phone” is used and can be used
               beyond the participant’s yard, this may be a cell phone opposed to a home
               landline phone.

    10. Is any type of smart phone OK to use for AuthentiCare?
                Only iPhones and phones that use Android as an operating system can be used
                for AuthentiCare.



Mobile App Webinars Q&A                                                                            1
    11. Is a Microsoft phone consider an android phone?
                Microsoft is not considered an Android phone.

    12. It's our understanding that Medicaid phones are not smartphones, so will Medicaid be
       replacing these phones with smartphones?
                Medicaid will not be replacing Medicaid recipient phones with smartphones. As a
                reminder, when required, the smartphone app is to be used on the aide’s or case
                manager’s smartphone.


Generic
    13. What happens if our caregivers do not have an iPhone or an android phone?
              If the aide is not able to use the app for participants without a landline phone, the
              provider will have to relinquish the case.

    14. Will there be a rate increase for this requirement?
                No, there will not be rate increase for this requirement.

    15. In the event that the agency plans to provide land lines to clients who do not have them
        how would we register the landline numbers into the system? Would this entry be made
        by the case manager or the providers?
                The case manager needs to enter the phone number into Phoenix.

    16. But if we can provide the worker with a phone why can't we provide the client a phone?
                A provider can provide a landline telephone for a participant as long as the
                provider has a written agreement with the participant that stipulate what will
                happen if the services being authorized are terminated.

    17. Is the phone set up so logging in and logging out a step by step process where one step
        must be completed before moving on to the next step?
                Yes this is a step by step process. The steps are outlined in the user’s guide
                located in the Phoenix help section.

    18. We are already receiving resolutions with mobile app not working as a reason. Is this a
        legitimate reason?
                This should only be used when CLTC has verified there is an issue with the
                mobile app. When this happens, an e-mail will be distributed.

    19. What if the caregiver's phone is disconnected? If they use the client's cell what will
        happen?
                Under no circumstance should the caregiver (aide) be using the client’s cell
                phone. If the caregiver’s phone is disconnected, resolutions will need to be
                submitted and the strike policy applied. CLTC may impose sanctions if we
                become aware of providers using client’s cell phones.

    20. What if the client’s phone is disconnected?
                If the aide is unaware the client’s phone has been disconnected, the aide should
                contact the provider to submit resolutions. The provider needs to immediately
                notify the case manager. If the phone is disconnected for 3 consecutive days,


Mobile App Webinars Q&A                                                                            2
                use of the mobile app will be required. If the client has a history of the phone
                being frequently disconnected, the mobile app needs to be used.

    21. Can our nurse use this clock-in system?
              Yes, the mobile app can be used by nurses providing nursing services and
              supervisory visits for personal care.

    22. Can we confirm that the worker or "company" must have the phone...not the client?
              Yes, the responsibility of the smart phone for use of the mobile app lies with the
              provider.

    23. I'm having problems with the Care Call link, scc.govconnect.com. I cannot get onto Care
        Call from the web link.
            The Care Call web link no longer exists. The web functions that were performed via
            Care Call were transferred to Phoenix in 2010.

    24. Does any other agencies have any best practices for purchasing agency phones? If so,
        are there ways to restrict the aide's use to only the app?
               If providers have this information, please share with other providers.

    25. I have a mother and daughter that provide Attendant Care to one participant. Can they
        buy one phone and use the same phone?
    26. Can a CM be registered to use two different phones? ( i.e.an iPhone and a Samsung)
    27. If two attendants provide services for a participant, can they both be registered to use
        the same phone?
             Yes. A single phone can be used by multiple workers. Likewise, one person can use
             multiple phones.

    28. Do DDSN workers use this app as well?
             The Care Call mobile app is not used by DDSN.

    29. I have clients say that, not all Androids have menu buttons.
                All phones have a menu button. You may need to consult the phone’s manual to
                determine how to locate and access the button.

    30. Will we have access to this power point? Will it be emailed?
    31. Will we be able to print this Power Point presentation?
    32. Will we be able to print the PowerPoint off?
               The PowerPoint has been posted in the Phoenix help section and is entitled
               “Care Call Mobile Application Webinar”. Yes, the presentation can be printed
               from the help section.

    33. If our client doesn't have a landline but a cell phone, do they have to download the app
        on their phone?
                 Under no circumstance should the mobile app be downloaded on a client’s
                 phone. Providing a device for use of the mobile app is the responsibility of the
                 provider and not the client.

    34. Please advise if area does not have reliable cell phone towers/signals how this is
        addressed.
               If an area does not towers that provide access to the internet, a Quick Response

Mobile App Webinars Q&A                                                                             3
                (QR) card needs to be ordered for the participant. To be able to order and scan
                the card via AuthentiCare, the worker needs to log into the app where there is
                internet coverage prior to getting to the client’s home.

    35. How do clients with multiple payers record their time? Many clients have Medicaid and
        Commercial or private pay or other combinations of payers. Nurses arrive and clock in
        and leave and clock out. Nurses can’t know who is paying for what hours all the time.
        This is often the case with third party liability claims.
                Services authorized by CLTC is not affected by this.

    36. Some nurses do not have cell phones and others do not have data. What alternative will
        that nurse have to use to continue to work without incurring a cost to the nurse?
                If the client has a landline phone, the nurse use the Care Call IVRS by call 1-888-
                978-2273. If the client does not have a landline phone and the nurse is not able
                to use the mobile app, the case will need to be relinquished and reauthorized to a
                provider who can use the mobile app.

    37. Will the nurses be able to leave the home with the patient if they are being tracked by
        GPS?
                Nurses and aides are not “being tracked by GPS”. The AuthentiCare mobile app
                is not tracking the movement of workers. Similarly to the Care Call phone
                system which verifies the client’s home phone is used, the mobile app verifies
                whether or not the nurse or aide checked in/out from the client’s address that is
                recorded in Phoenix.

    38. Normally a nurse would not be allowed to enter patient information into their personal
        device. Is this not considered a HIPAA violation?
               No, this is not considered a HIPAA violation.

    39. Why does my aide iPhone not work with the app? At login screen it say log in failed.
              You need to verify the device ID is correct. If the device ID is not correct, you will
              need to remove the mobile app information from Phoenix, then remove and
              reinstall the mobile app on the smart phone.


Data

    40. What happens if the worker runs out of data?
              If a worker runs out of data, resolutions can be submitted and the current strike
              policy applied.

    41. Will this use the phone data? Everyone does not have the data on their phone.
                 Yes a data plan is required to use the mobile app UNLESS the phone is
                 accessing the internet via Wi-Fi.


Training
    42. We cannot get the training system to work. Is anyone else having this problem?
              Issues with the training system should be resolved. If you are still having
              problems, please notify CLTC state office.


Mobile App Webinars Q&A                                                                            4
    43. We are new is there a training for providers to get set up and learn how to have workers
        use the system to call in and call out?
               CLTC has provider trainings every quarter. To find out when the next training is
               scheduled you can send an e-mail to provider-distribution@scdhhs.gov. These
               trainings are not specific to Care Call or AuthentiCare. To assist with learning
               about the mobile app, there is a mobile app training site and mobile app users’
               guide.

    44. Are we able to request a copy of this portion of the pp presentation to show during new
        employee orientation?
               The PowerPoint is located in Phoenix help section. There is also an
               AuthentiCare training mobile app that can be used for assistance.

    45. When trying to use the training app which password do we use?
              Please refer to the document named “Care Call IVR and Mobile App Training
              Environment” that is located in the Phoenix help section.

    46. Are you recommending not to use the training system for clock in? It sounds like it is
        compromising HIPPA.
               No we are not recommending this and this is not comprising HIPPA. None of
               the information in the training system is for real clients.


Making Visits – Checking in/out

    47. If we have an employee working overnight do they have to check back in at 2am?
    48. When providing service overnight, do the nurses have to re-clock in at 2:00 am?
    49. Our nurses work overnight shifts. Will this software be able to tract the hours properly
        when they cross a dateline?
    50. If my shift is from 6pm to 6am, what will happen to my data at 2AM?
                If the nurse checks in one day and checks out the next day, Care Call will match
                the check in/out to one claim. The worker does not have to check out at 2:00 am
                then check back in. Nothing happens to your data at 2:00 am. It is still in the
                system.

    51. Twice weekly, PCII drops off participant where his spouse works. This means that the
        worker will need to check out at a different location. How would we handle this?
               The aide will check out using the mobile application when the client is dropped
               off to the spouse. The claim will have an “L” exception code which indicates the
               checkout did not occur at the client’s home.

    52. Can you check in on a client's phone and out on your app or do you have to check in
        and out the same way?
               Yes, you can check in using one method and check out using a different method.
               Question #50 is an example of when this might occur. The aide may check into
               Care Call from the home using the client’s home phone then check out using the
               AuthentiCare mobile app.

    53. Why do I get L codes when in participant's home? Also participant's name does not
        show up but in Phoenix shows they are geocoded successfully.
    54. I have several places that I go the GPS will not pick up the location. Cell phone has cell

Mobile App Webinars Q&A                                                                           5
        but because of rural areas some do not geo code correctly. I am at the house but it will
        not pick up my location so it shows L codes in Care Call.
                L codes indicate the check in/out did not occur from the “fence” set around a
                client’s home. Phoenix and AuthentiCare have set an invisible fence around the
                address the case manager has entered. If the aide is outside of this fence, the
                claim will have an L code. For some locations such as a trailer park, the fence
                has to be manually changed by the programmer to prevent L codes. If you are
                the case manager and see that Phoenix is showing the person has been
                geocoded successfully, report a problem in Phoenix requesting the fence be
                adjusted.

    55. What happens when the client has therapy once a week and PCA worker escort client to
        treatment center.
               The aide will need to check out using the mobile application and the claim will
               generate an L exception code. Please notify the case manager via Phoenix
               conversations so he or she will know why the claims are getting L codes.

    56. If you forget to check out on mobile app and realize later or next day, what is to be
        done?
                A resolution needs to be submitted.

    57. I have a participant that goes from his house to his daughter's house. When I call to
        make appointment I find out where he is. How will I handle this? He has a landline but
        never works.
               You can use the mobile application. If you check in/out from the daughter’s
               house, the claims will have an L expectation.

    58. Will there be a service for supervise visits?
                Yes there are supervisory visits in AuthentiCare. For supervisors it always
                appears at the top of the services list.

    59. Since multiple services are listed do we still need to clock in and out for each separate
        services i.e. a PCI shift plus a PCII shift, or can we just clock in and out at the beginning
        of one service shift and the end of the 2nd service shift?
               The AuthentiCare mobile app works just like the Care Call phone system so you
               will be able to clock in for both services during one session. You are also able to
               clock in for multiple clients at the same time.

    60. If a client has a land-line phone are they required to have worker check in on land line
        and via the app?
    61. For a participant with a landline, can we clock in with either their landline or the aide's
        cell phone? Do we have a choice of how to clock in?
                 The worker should not be checking in on both devices. The mobile app is
                 another way for the aide to check in/out when serving a client. The worker can
                 choose which method to check in and check out.

    62. Is the mobile app set up to match the days of authorization? Ex. If a patient has PC1 2
        days a week will it come up only for the two days like the current care call does?
    63. I'm with MCCW Program, will there be options for us to choose Quarterly Visit, Re-
        Evaluation Visit, or Children Screening for clock ins?
                Yes, the mobile app works just like the phone system and will know the service

Mobile App Webinars Q&A                                                                               6
                that is to be provided and the days of the week for personal care. It will also
                allow for the type of visit to be entered by MCC workers and case managers.


    64. We don't always complete visits in the home, we see kids in the hospital, MD office,
        School, Daycare, other family member's house. Do we need to geocode all addresses
        in Phoenix or can we choose the location not found option?
               When visiting a child outside of the home, you will need to manually check in and
               enter the CLTC number.


Grace Period

    65. Will the employees be allowed a grace period to learn the system without getting
        strikes?
    66. What if the caregiver started using the app now and she couldn't clock out because of
        the network? Is she in the grace period now or only starting April 1st???
    67. If we have worker's that started using the App 2 weeks ago will they get a grace period
        also?
    68. After the 30 days grace period; are we still allow to do resolution? If yes please give an
        example.
    69. Will there be a grace period for employee's using the mobile app. concerning the care
        call strike policy??
    70. A grace period even if employees have been registered prior to April 1st??

                Yes, employees will be given a grace period to learn the system. For the month
                of April 2016 strikes will not be applied to workers for mobile app claims. This
                applies to workers who start using the mobile app on April 1, 2016 and for
                workers who were using the app prior to this date. After the grace period, the
                strike policy will be applied when CLTC has to work mobile app resolutions. We
                expect resolutions to decrease significantly since use of the mobile app is a
                requirement for participants without a landline phone.

                When the requirement of the mobile app became mandatory on April 1, 2016,
                there was a problem with Phoenix that caused a delay in information being sent
                to Care Call. Due to this problem, some workers could not use the mobile app.
                If this happens after the grace period, resolutions will be accepted without strikes
                being applied.


QR (Quick Response) Card
   71. How do we obtain the QR code so that the aides can scan?
   72. Please explain in detail how the caregiver can request a QR Card for their clients.
   73. How does a client obtain a QR ID Card? And also do we need to register the worker on
       the profile and workers tab?
               A Quick Response (QR) card is requested by the worker when in the client’s
               home and no cell coverage is available. Additional information can be found in
               the manual under the section entitled “Check-in using a Consumer ID card with
               QR (Quick Response) Code Functionality”.
               Yes, workers who will be using QR cards need to have their phones registered
               on the workers tab.

Mobile App Webinars Q&A                                                                              7
    74. Once a person card is requested does the worker have to check in again the next day or
        do we do a resolution?
               You will need to do resolutions until the card arrives.

    75. Must the caregiver not have available service in the area in order for the caregiver to be
       prompted to order the QR Code Card?
              Yes, the option is only available when there is no service in the area.

    76. Why is the worker doing the card and not the case manager? Is the case manager
        required to check in as well and sorry shouldn't this be part of the assessment process of
        the case manager?
               Yes, the case manager is required to check in and would not be aware a card is
               needed until making a home visit and there is no service available. The card
               needs to be requested by the first person who makes a visit and identifies there
               is a need for the card. This could be the case manager or the aide.

    77. We may have numerous aides covering the same client. Each one of them would be
        requesting this card and it will be administratively confusing.
               AuthentiCare is aware when a card has already been ordered. If there are
               multiple requests within a short time frame, multiple cards will not be sent unless
               it is an occasional mistake. AuthentiCare is also able to send a new card and
               inactivate the old card, if the card is lost. Please ask your aide to notify you when
               a QR card has been requested. As a courtesy, you are asked to notify the case
               manager via Phoenix conversations that a card has been ordered. By doing so,
               the case manager can alert any other providers who may be serving the client
               and will need access to the card.

    78. Will the app request these cards?
                The app will request the card when prompted to do so by the case manager or
                aide.

    79. Can office staff order the QR cards from the office for our clients?
               Office staff cannot order QR cards. Cards can only by requested using the app.

    80. What happens when the application cannot connect in an area? Our aide is unable to
        pull the application up to request a QR card. What should we do?
                When the aide is aware the app cannot connect in an area, the aide needs to log
                into the app where there is coverage. By doing so, the aide will be able to
                request the card and use the app when the card arrives. If the client is in an area
                without coverage and the aide does not log into the app prior to arriving to the
                home, a card cannot be requested and the app cannot be used.


Passwords
   81. How long after we give our workers their password can they long in to the app?
             When you enter a password in Phoenix, the worker will be able to use the
             password immediately.

    82. I have set up the app for some of my workers, but I have been having problems login in
        and have their password changed.

Mobile App Webinars Q&A                                                                           8
                For log in issues, check the device ID. In 99% of log in issues, the device ID is
                incorrect.

    83. I did not try to change their password. They did that themselves and were unable to
       change it to login...NO HIPAA VIOLATION PLEASE
               Aides are able to change their own passwords. However, please note, when the
               AuthentiCare password is changed on the device by the worker, the new
               password can’t be used until the next day. The worker will need to keep
               using the old password until the next day. If the aide has forgotten the password
               and needs to sign in immediately, the office needs to be contacted to reset the
               password in Phoenix.

    84. Can an aide be re-registered because the password will not work?
              An aide cannot be re-registered because the password will not work. The
              password issue needs to be resolved. Also as a reminder, Phoenix will not allow
              a provider to register a worker more than once because a social security number
              is required.

    85. What is the process if a worker is locked out due to password/forgot password?
               The worker needs to contact their provider for the password to be reset. If the
               worker is an attendant, CLTC needs to be contacted to reset the password.


Phoenix

    86. How can you change a worker's ID if that is the official ID of the worker? Please explain.
              Worker IDs cannot be changed. The worker needs to use the ID that was
              registered by the provider.

    87. Will the case manager indicate if the participant has a land line or not on the referral we
        receive so we know how we are to clock in?
                When a referral is made, if the case manager has not indicated the person has a
                landline phone, the referral will indicate in red “Client requires the use of the mobile
                application due to lack of landline phone.

    88. How can I get the app reset in Phoenix with new Device ID number? I have tried
        removing the old ID number. When I enter the new ID # nothing has changed on the
        worker's registration screen.
    89. How I can get the old Device ID number out of the worker's registration page. I've tried
        removing it, I've tried deleting it but it won't go away.
               You will need to remove the existing device. This is done by checking the
               “remove” box then clicking “save”. Once this is done you can add another mobile
               device.




Mobile App Webinars Q&A                                                                               9
