Medically Complex Children Waiver Frequently Asked Questions – Oct. 28, 2022
                                                Environmental Modifications


1. How are we going to do this and go through the correct process without going into the
   home? Care Coordinators must be able to validate that the environmental modification
   request is required to ensure the health, welfare and safety of the waiver participant.
   Additionally, the request must be added to person-centered plan of care. Please refer to SC
   Solutions Leadership to determine how the Care Coordination team will certify the need for
   the request.
2. I have a good amount of participants that do not qualify for MCCW, but they have also
   requested home mods before. Will home modifications be allowed for clients who are still
   enrolled in MCCW due to the PHE, but who otherwise do not qualify for MCCW?
   The service is available to MCCW participants meeting eligibility requirements for waiver
   enrollment and participation. Per your question, the participants do not qualify for MCCW
   services.
3. Are CAs or DME Advocates able to assist with any of this? Authorizing and coordinating
   this service is similar to the authorization and coordination of other services on the service
   plan. The coordination of this service is associated with routine functions of the care
   coordination/case management activity.
4. How will this look if we do start in October like Janice suggested but we aren't back to doing
   home visits yet? SC Solutions will establish protocols in adherence with guidance from
   SCDHHS to establish return to face-to-face visit schedules. All environmental
   modifications must be deemed necessary to ensure the health, welfare, and safety of the
   participant. Photographic evidence is required and must be secured in order to process
   requests.
5. Are the home modifications just for walk in showers and handrails? Are there other repairs/
   mods to the home that the $7,500 cap will cover? Environmental modifications are
   determined on a case-by-case basis and are authorized to ensure the health, welfare, and
   safety of the participant or that enable the participant to function with greater
   independence in the home. Cosmetic repairs are not authorizable.
6. There was a place mentioned where we are supposed to provide pictures of the
   ramp needing to be installed. Since we are not authorized to go to the homes for visits, does
   this allow us out to the home for pictures? SCDHHS does not prohibit SC Solutions staff
   from entering homes. Staff are expected to follow directives form SC Solutions Leadership
   and employ COVID precautions when performing tasks associated with activities of
   waiver case management.
7. How do we bill for a visit to take pictures and measurements if we are not allowed to
   complete visits? SC Solutions should conduct the environmental modification assessment
   during the regularly scheduled care coordination visit/activity. This practice does not
   require a separate visit or billing guidelines.
8. Just a clarification, are we allowed to put ramps onto rental properties? I had heard at one
   time that this wasn't allowed. A landowner agreement must be completed as part of the
   ramp approval process. The owner of the property must approve the installation.
